Okay. So this this little bit that I sent out to you that, of course, was unreadable, but this way you know at least that I was trying. I I I wanted you to have a brief sense of of Tolkien's academic style, which you you will or would or have discovered, um, is not all that dissimilar from from his literary style. Actually, let's let's back up a moment. Um, how how much of this, uh, fantasy literature have you all read?
Lewis, have you read all all seven Narnia books? Do do you agree? Nothing. Okay. I don't remember most of it because I read it when I was, like, seven.
Yeah. Yeah. I just just recently I just recently read Oh, really? The Wardrobe. Uh-huh.
Yeah. I read the suit that and the the great divorce. And the great divorce. Any any of you read the screw tape letters? I keep meaning to, and I have it.
I started it. Okay. Okay. Well, what what did you think about Cantor's, uh, assessment of the Narnia series as uneven and very much for children, for schoolboys? Right?
Not just children. I was confused more about like, I've been told and I've learned of CS Lewis more as a born again Christian. Mhmm. Not as what they were talking about, which was, you know, the pessimistic and stuff like that and depressive religious stuff. And in fact, what I found always with the Narnia ones and especially with the great divorce was it was really, really uplifting because unlike a lot of other Christian things where it's sort of pressing down on you, that there was this good you know, horrible evil and wonderful good, but it was the human choice of which one they wanted.
And they could choose, and they could change their mind a few times Mhmm. And stuff like that. And that was what was so uplifting to it, which really confused me then. And I was like Cantor I mean, we're gonna talk about this, but but Cantor doesn't really like either of these characters, does he? I wanted to ring his neck.
You wanted to ring Cantor's neck? Oh, okay. Okay. Alright. Well, you'll get your chance to ring Cantor's neck.
So okay. So let's let's hold on to that. So Lewis is fairly well known in at least the vaguest in general sense, except for Anne Marie, who didn't grow up in The United States. So part of the point that Cantor is making here that I think is valid is that there's this particular kind of intellectual intellectual space which opens up in Britain between the wars and and into World War two that appeals for maybe some set of bizarre reasons. You wanna sit probably down at that end.
To Americans in particular. And so we can think about we can think about that too. Right? What's going on with that? Okay.
So what about Tolkien? So okay. We've all we've all seen the movie recently. We we no? Yeah.
I'm the odd one out. Never read the books. Never seen the movies. Oh, really? I know nothing about Tolkien.
Okay. Is that is that right? Odd odd one out? The rest of you I'm pretty sure I'm the odd one out since I'm always the odd one out when I say that. So No.
I know one other person. But you've all read the books in addition to It's all really interesting. Oh, everything. Okay. Okay.
Right. The whole the whole nine yards and then some. Okay. Well, okay. Good.
Good. So so we're we have a my assumption coming in was that we would be fairly mutually literate in this respect. Let me start by taking us back to last week. As I was saying, when I was first handing back the discussion papers, it was clear, not only from our conversation, but then going back and reading your discussion notes after class that that Bynum's book was deeply disturbing. Yes.
Okay. And I wish I wish Greg were here because in particular, Greg had he said this in class, but then he also, again, emphasized it in his in his discussion paper that that the book was so different. Her argument, the things she was talking about were so different than than the Catholic institution that he understood from, you know, his childhood experience and and and whatever else. And one of the things that we had talked about last week was at least the possibility that the piece of the medieval mental world that mine that Bynum is exploring is one that has not particularly come forward to us. Although, right, we talked a little bit about the fascination with this current passion movie.
Right? And that that shares some of that that particular kind of a medieval sensibility. Obviously, Tolkien and and maybe Lewis to a less obvious extent, but but Tolkien in particular has very much reached into the present. Right? With with at least a medievalism.
Right? A kind of sensibility that is derived, and we can talk about how medieval is it really. But a sensibility that people understand to be medieval and and which is totally appealing. Right? Mill billions and billions of dollars worth appealing.
I mean, aside from the fact that Cantor doesn't like it very much. Although, doesn't one suspect that he's just jealous? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's that tone.
I mean, he even talks about he he talks about the other Oxford Dons who were jealous, and you could just tell he completely empathizes. Okay. So we can we can we can write we can write him. Down because he made money off of it. Things like that.
Anything that's popular and makes money is obviously not, you know, good enough quality for or something like I think there's a piece of that. I mean, was a whole Marxist school of thought in the really in the seventies, I guess, coming out of the British public school system, which is their private school system, so not to confuse you, that that was very anti Tolkien and more or less the gist of it was this is so popular, it's made so much money, must be capitalism at its sort of rawest, nakedest, most vile manifestation, which seems kind of ironic. If there was ever a Luddite, it's our friend, Tolkien. He's not exactly the entrepreneur. On the edge of his next million.
But anyway, that accusation has been made. If the masses appreciate it and pay for it, surely it can't be any good. So and we'll so and we'll we'll we'll come back to that. But before we do that, how do we square Bynum with this medieval sensibility that you've now been exposed to in its scholarly version in Lewis' The Discarded Image. This model that Lewis says is out there, that everybody more or less subscribes to, this is the world and how they understand it, How does that square or even or even Tolkien's made up world that is at least, um, uh, based, right, on his understanding of of a real medieval world.
How do we square that with Bynum? Yeah. Go ahead. Go ahead, Ian. Lewis made the assertion that the people in medieval society kept this stuff, this model, and their religion entirely separate.
That that they that they tried to you know, that that they could reconcile they didn't even reconcile these things in their head. They just they weren't like, the two were just wholly separate. And they could have these, in many cases, what we might call contradictory views now. You know that was the way it is by there. Okay.
Yeah. Go go ahead. Just I think talking from the present perspective, like, Lewis' model is very familiar. Like, I don't know if it's just more well known. Nothing that in this book that I read was really new to me.
Mhmm. I don't think I don't know if that's because I've been exposed to media literature before, but it was it was fairly standard and ordinary. Whereas, as Greg said, the buying in was just extraordinary. So Is that true for all of you? Is this a model that is readily accessible to you floating around in your head?
Someone says, oh, that man is so coloric, and you know instantly. Or they say, by Jove, and you know instantly what is being invoked. Or, you know, if I was to break up a fight in the hallway and say, ugh, the influence of Mars at work again, everybody around me would know me. Is that true? You had three of those.
Two are three? Okay. Go go to Peter. The references to, I guess, gods, which I just kind of have acquired over the years, the influence of Mars and the relation to the planets, everything else he mentioned was new to me. And that might be because I have never besides The Canterbury Tales, which isn't even really that medieval sequenly exposure I have to that literature.
You're not exposed to it, don't think you really have a place to pick it up until This book was very I learned a lot from it because I had never been exposed to it before. Good, useful cocktail party information. Perhaps. Another cocktail party. Go ahead, Nick.
Yeah. That's I mean, that's I wrote about is that I had a real hard time connecting with the first part because I've never read like Chaucer or Dante or any of those guys and like he kept like quoting them and stuff and it was like Yeah, I had the same issue that he kept putting in all this evidence and I couldn't put it into context of where this evidence came from. Yeah, that makes sense, but it would be a lot more rewarding if I knew exactly the context that that evidence came in. What were you gonna say, Miranda? I guess I had a lot of it was more like I had sort of known some of these ideas, but I never really like, I read, oh, yeah.
Yeah. They have you know, they thought that the earth was the middle of sun. You know, I never really thought about them and why, you know and I always thought of them as, you know, well, we're more advanced than that. We've gotten that idea. But what I liked was that, especially at the beginning of the heavens thing, he sort of went, you know, well, your idea you know, the modern idea of how the laws of nature work Yes.
Are just as stupid as theirs. You know? No. He doesn't say they're stupid. It's just it's not we're not you know, it's not that we are the same way maybe?
It was that we're not like, it sort of broke down that we are better than their ideas that, you know, why is it that our ideas that, well, you know, these things are sentient beings that, you know, therefore can obey laws versus their ideas, well, they like each other, and therefore they wanna get to you. They wanna get together. Right. That's right. You know?
Okay. If I'm a stone, I'm heavy. And I desperately want to be where I belong, which is on the earth. So if somebody drops me off of a tower, I'm going to get as quickly as I possibly can back to earth, which is down. Right?
Okay. And that's what I do if I'm a stone. Now in our world, we have this thing called the law of gravity. And if I drop a stone off of a tower, the gravity police jump out. Right?
In the in the the metaphor that he uses. Right? And you know, says, get thee down to that large mass. Right? And whoo, off I go.
Because I've been told that's what I'm supposed to do. Mean, the passage is on 94. But though neither statement can be taken literally, it does not follow that it makes no difference which is used. On the imaginative and emotional level, it makes a great difference whether, with the medievals, we project upon the universe our strivings and desires or with the moderns, our police system and our traffic regulations. I mean, do you did you find that compelling?
It's a kind of an upsetting way to think about gravity though, isn't it? Yes and no. But, I mean, I'm kinda torn as to whether or to like, initially, I just think, know, well, that's kind of shallow assessment on his part of how we are looking at at something like that. You know, that, well well, you dummy. You know, that's not actually how we think about it.
But I feel like if he made a case that, you know, because because a physicist doesn't really think that, you know, that that there's that something is obeying a law. It's that there is a set of mathematical equations which describe how something what something does, what happens. Not that it's but then that's really people could have thought in in kind of similar there could have been more to what they were thinking in medieval times about the actions of things, you know, in in their their likes and dislikes. They could have understood it. And and I he's kind of kind of alludes the fact that they understood it better than that I just use that as allegory.
Let me let me ask you a question about math. Mhmm. Okay. And this is not this is not a question that that the medieval man would ever have even had to have thought about. But do you believe that math is true?
Right? And by true, I mean true with like a capital t. True for all time, for all place because it's true and separate. Right? Not true because I figured it out and the formulas all line up together okay, but true because it's really true.
And therefore, when we figure out that gravity works in a certain way and here's the mathematical formula, all we're doing is tapping into a truth that's already there. Do do you all believe that? Yeah. Peter. I mean, I view math more as a tool to create a model.
I mean, I think I think Lewis makes the point somewhere that even, you know, up until the nineteen twenties and thirties, we were still viewing a model we thought was true and then we started getting into quantum mechanics and that kind of changed our whole view of the earth. I mean, you told someone in the 1900s that if you jumped into a wall enough, you'd actually go through it at one point, they wouldn't believe you. But it's statistically possible to do something like that. But you can't really have a problem. In my experience, is no model that will describe everything.
There's just a whole bunch of tools that describe that thing, kind of how Lewis says that they had a whole bunch of observations and then they made a model that fit it. And now we have a whole bunch of other rather bizarre things by classical physics standards that And you have to create a new model. So I don't think that there is any I don't think that math can be viewed as true. It's just oh, wait a minute. Okay.
If you start from that position, then the medieval position is not hard to walk yourself into at all. Right? It's just working with a slightly different set of tools, different set of authors, ancient authorities, etcetera. However, if you really believe that the math thing is true with a capital t, it's much harder to buy this. Right?
Then this is wrong in the capital w kind of a way. Right? Because the other thing is true and this isn't that and therefore it's a question of having missed the mark, misunderstood the facts. Right? Not not tapped into reality.
And my guess is, Peter, that your kind of ecumenical view on this is not widely shared around here. Um, well, at least in my well, I'm not a physicist. We kinda do fake physics in my department. But You do fake physics. Okay.
You know, kinda breeze through it. What were you gonna say, Mona? I'm with him. I agree with you. I mean, math I mean, math is But there might be a reason you're all in this class.
Yeah. Go go ahead, Anne Marie, and then Annie. No. I mean, I'm a physicist, and I don't think mathematics has an existence on its own. Okay.
I don't I don't think it's like a being Like, you almost described it as like it's not math doesn't exist without the models. Like, I don't think I think actually most physicists now, right, if we could have caught them all, what, twenty five years ago, we would have gotten a slightly different answer. Right? I I mean, I think it's really changed. Mhmm.
People are a lot more comfortable with being less certain. But what what were you gonna say, Annie? Well, I don't know. I guess I'm a freak of Korean. I don't know.
I do sort of think math is true, and that, like, one and one will always equal two no matter what, no matter where you are, no matter what time you're in. One and one are always two. Never changes. And that, like, yeah, our models change. Like, we're always learning new things, and we're always making better observations and coming up with new models, but presumably, we're getting closer and closer to the truth.
So the capital t. And Okay. So I don't think, I don't know, I don't think that the medieval way was necessarily wrong, right, because it was based on the observations they had, like, similar to what Peter thinks. And now we have more observations, and so we have a better model. You But, know, who knows?
In a hundred years, we probably have something completely different than what we think now, and quantum mechanics will be crazy and, you know Mhmm. Whatever. Think we were all, like and, you know, there'll be all those stupid people in the twentieth century that thought that, but I feel like we're getting closer somehow. I don't know. What were you gonna say, mom?
Mom? I forgot. Okay. I've always I had a problem with with you saying one plus one equals one or one plus one equals two. In fact, if you take a a lot of people have been having sort of I'm joking around.
If you take a lot of the model, you know, the mathematical models, you know, x squared, x, you know, x equals plus, like, you can you can prove things like one equals two and problematic. And it's sort of problematic because by you, you know, manipulating these little x's and squares and, you know, square roots and stuff, you can make things equal other things that, you know, in, you know, one cup plus two cups doesn't really, you know, doesn't actually always equal three type of thing. And it's really weird because Sounds like a faulty proof to me. Wrong and easy enough start dividing by zero. Yeah.
It's it's easy enough to like, I think, therefore, you can't take it as absolute fact because it's just gotten so complicated that you can manipulate it into whatever facts you want. But, I mean, I I I think that's kind of just because you can manipulate it in a fashion that is against the rules. I mean, if he is someone who doesn't necessarily know all the rules can can can misunderstand it. I don't think it makes it necessarily fallible. Jump jump in, Nick.
I mean, I kinda agree with Annie. Like, I think there's, like, especially arithmetic. Like, I think I kinda believe that one plus one is always gonna equal two. Like, I've seen some guys prove that it doesn't, but I don't know. And, like, also, think geometry had some, like, innately true properties like circles and triangles.
I think there's some things there that no matter where you find them, they'll always be the same, like if an angle is an angle and stuff like that. Well, geometry is a problem. And degrees can never trisect an angle. I mean, that is couldn't. I mean, you could think that you could split an angle into three equal parts, but you can't.
I mean, using geometric constructs is impossible. I mean, everything you everything you do in math is based on a certain set of assumptions just like everything we do in physics. I mean, all quantum mechanics is based on some number of postulates. Mhmm. Yeah.
I forgot the number. But, I mean, there's all I mean, it's all based on what you think is true. You can do non Euclid in geometry and just completely throw everything that you know about classical geometry out the window. And, I mean, if, you know, Euclid believed one thing based on his set of assumptions, but, you know, anti Euclid can, you know, get completely different results. Let me let me let me ask a a slightly different question, but that I think will still keep us thinking about this set of problems.
If Lewis is right and that what the and that we could characterize the general medieval mindset as having a couple of characteristics. One, it's bookish. Right? He claims that in no uncertain terms. It wants to believe everything, right, that's ever been written by an authority.
It's systematic. Right? It wants to take all of the different things that it's read and somehow make sense of them. So he says, right, if there was an invention they would have really appreciated, it was the card index. That's a really great line.
That's a wonderful line. If it is those things and we know that there's all of this sort of competing information that's out there, we're struggling right now with some competing information in our own sort of niche of the cosmological project. Where does that leave a medieval thinker? Right? If they if Lewis is right and they're compelled, right, to be systematic and eclectic, although they might not have seen it that way, and to believe all authorities whether they're pagan, Christian, poetry, or history, or chronicle, whatever.
If I have to take all of this stuff and somehow make sense of it, where does that leave me? Mean, Lewis might just be wrong. That's one possibility. Multiple personalities. Okay.
A lot of demented individuals of which we read, you know, last week. I don't think that was why they were demented, though. Yeah. Ian? I I think that the the kind of naive belief of anyone presuming to be an authority is is, you know, is just that.
It's rather naive and and kind of results in I'd like to think that that if there's any one thing that we now do better than than they might have done, it's, you know, valuing certain authorities over others, you know, or or or weighing the weighing the value of certain things or rather not just on the basis of how interesting it is or how compelling they wrote. Mhmm. But it's I don't know. I I I think that's the maybe well, I guess I'm not really answering the question. That was just my the one thing you made me think about was that they're I mean, the I think they just they ended up getting modeling a lot of things together simply based on the fact that they're willing to take poets as scientific authorities, things like that that they Let me are they actually willing to take poets as scientific authorities?
Is that Or they quote them supportive scientific authority. Alright. Is there a distinction? Well I mean, there was much less of it. I mean, the poets wrote a lot about science whereas you don't see many poets writing about our model of the universe.
Mean Oh. Originally, I had to take this class with Sean Hildebyde, and we read this book about astrophysical poetry. I thought I was going to die. A lot of I I talk about that with a lot of people. Yeah.
People write sonnets in 03/00/1991, and it's you know, they're not very pretty. I think there's I think there's a wider divide. I mean, I think Ian what Ian's saying is probably just a wider divide now between the authorities than there was back then. That poets had a better Maybe they had a better understanding of their model, or that it was much more accessible to them than our model is today. So, it's harder for us But is Lewis then being inconsistent when he tells us, which he does in no uncertain terms, that theology, right, spiritual advice, all that stuff is in fact separate from the general cultural model.
I mean, how do we square that? What kinda makes sense? I mean, think about how many scientists are Christians. Right? Like, you know, you're a scientist and you, you know, you go to church in one day and you believe that God created the world in seven days, but then on Monday, you go to, like, your work and you believe in evolution.
And But that's not the claim exactly that Lewis is making. Right? I mean, he says oh, go ahead, Mana. Just in terms of religion, it makes sense because all of a I mean, before I mean, when you look at the pagan religions, it's a nature is a big part of the religion. You can't it's very hard to separate the world that exists from the theology that exists.
Mhmm. On the other hand, with the religions like Christianity, they're they are removed from the natural world. So it's easier to play it's easier to see that there was that there could've that people who were both Christians could see both the natural world and theological world as two separate things because they don't really interact that much. But I think they're talking more about almost like a psychological Mhmm. Divide.
I mean, there's it's almost as if when you're thinking about one, you're just completely ignoring the other. Right? But isn't that like I mean, I mean, I'm very much a non religious person, but it sounds like a lot of it is very much of the Christianity stuff is that there's, you know, there's heaven and there's hell, but earth is just something you deal with while you're, you know, trying to work away your sins and to get to heaven. And so figuring out how earth works isn't really what, you know, something to do with religion. It's more your own moralistic stuff that's dealing with it and then dealing with then figuring that out is separate than that.
Go go ahead. But now I have to think of this one passage where they talk about being in a the earth being the center of the universe. Right? Thinking of a Mhmm. That but then then there's this passage which states you are outside the city walls.
Thus so I think here we have this kind of fundamental juxtaposition where these two conflict. Mhmm. Because in one way, yes, God is the center and is the light. Mhmm. And in this other way, which puts us at the periphery, but in in the model Right.
We are at the center. Right. And so, I mean, there there has to be some exchange of then if he does explain how they're trying to reconcile this that we're actually looking inward and therefore we are at the center, but we really are not. So Mhmm. I mean, I think there was conflict in people's minds that they were trying to to decide what what was right.
They were not divorcing the two entirely. Well, he let's let's go back to Lewis' argument because it's a it is a complicated one. It starts I mean, it goes through the whole book, really. Right? But it's he lays it out first, um, starting on page 18.
And he says, he he opens up a space for himself to be contradictory, essentially, by saying one particular class of experts, the great spiritual writers, ignore the model almost completely. We need to know something about the model for to read Chaucer, but we can neglect it if we're gonna read Saint Bernard. Right? Or the imitation of Christ or blah blah blah. He gives all these possibilities.
So that's one way of dealing with this is saying even though the model looks to be intensely religious. Right? The spheres, the intelligences, um, the inclining because of the love of god, the premium mobile. Why is the premium mobile even moving? Well, because it loves god so much.
Right? And because it loves God so much, it has to move. And in what direction does it move? It's perfect love after all, so it moves in a circle. Right?
Isn't this obvious? That this would be how I mean, all of that sounds to us kind of religious. Right? If we if we had to just sort of read it casually and classify it now, we'd say, oh, wow. What a lot of religious superstition.
And by the same token, it seems like a lot of the spirit the great spiritual writers he cites, I I mean, I wouldn't be surprised if, you know, a generation later, they were being quoted in in, you know, in research being done by medieval writers and Did you get put in the model? The model. Right? I mean, it seems like the way he characterizes these authors, that that's exactly what they would They do get used in the building of the model even though they don't rely on the model. Exactly.
Absolutely. Let let let's go on just a little bit further in that passage. There, that is the medievals. Right? Their cosmology and their religion were not such easy bedfellows as might be supposed.
Right? That's the that's the irony here. And we, at first, may fail to notice this. For the cosmology appears to us in its firmly theistic basis and its ready welcome to the supernatural to be eminently religious. That's what I was trying to say and paraphrase.
But then he says it is not eminently Christian. So he has this long text in which everything is pulled together, everything is syncretic. Right? Everything is eclectic. We we work and work and work to save the appearances.
And yet, on this one fundamental issue, we have this unbridgeable divide, right, which is Christian, that is theology, spiritual advice, homiletics, whatever, and then kind of the way we think the world really works. And the way we write poetry and the way we make illusions and metaphors and the allegories we tell and the fiction we write and the way we write love poetry and and write and everything else that's important in life. If this is true, if if Lewis isn't just setting this up to help himself get out of his sticky wicket, right, which he might be, one way we can reconcile these medievalists, if you will, the medieval world that we feel so comfortable imagining and say Bynum's medieval world, which is so bizarre to us, is we could say, well, you know, Middle Earth is comfortable because Middle Earth is clearly part of this model. And Bynum's saints are so uncomfortable to us because they're part of that thing that is eminently Christian. Right?
They're the real deal. So I mean, haven't read the books for a very long time. The but I don't remember that much religious stuff in the JRO. Like, comment like, you know, a lot of books nowadays when a lot I mean, a lot of books nowadays when they write fantasy thing, set up the whole world with, you know, here's one land, here's another land, here's another land, here's the governments of these places, which both he did. And here is the basic religion of the group.
That was the Silmarillion structure. Entirely, you know, it starts from creation, basically by God and who creates these things, who sing and create the world, and which is, you know, an eminently We know where that comes from. The singing as part of creation. Feynor. It sounds like something that was mentioned in here.
Yeah. It's also in in in in Boethius, the his consolation of philosophy. Um, basically, all all philosophy comes to us through the I guess, I don't I don't quite wanna say angelic, but the, you know, the celestial voices in in song. It's an interesting idea. And and I and I think it's not an accident that Tolkien is so fond of the of lyric poetry.
Right? I mean, the book doesn't actually sing, but it practically does. Right? If you read it out loud, it would be good if you knew what meter to put with all of those poems, wouldn't it? When you read it out loud, you're never quite sure what to do with those because you have this feeling that you should have heard them before you just read them.
And the I mean, the thing that the The Silmarillion is the the Kenta Silmarillion, and it's supposed to be a whole long poem, and he's paraphrasing it, right, in summary for us. And then, you know, sometimes he has excerpts of the real thing and we'll have Yeah. You know, and even everything else, you know, all the other little stories he tells. He's like, well, I'm just paraphrasing the Right. The songs and the the balance.
Right. Well, I mean, the the the line of confusion for him between storytelling that is writing fiction and chronicle writing that is being a historian is very is very fine. And and one of the ways you know that is because at the end of at the end of the Return of the King, you get all those appendices. Right? I mean, how many works of fiction come with, what, six, seven appendices?
And and some of the appendices are about language. Okay. Fine. You know, we don't all speak Elvish, so we have to have that clarified for us. But some of the appendices are exactly the kind of appendices a historian would write.
Now it turns out you actually need to know this prequel. You need to know this tale. You need to know how this happened. You need to know where these people came from. Right?
It's completely like a historical text. You know, write down to the footnotes and the appendices. Why you know, if you're really writing fiction, why not just get that into the story? After all, you could. But it makes it makes it more readable.
Just like a a historian who's, you know, trying to write something and make it make his his treat as readable rather than dry, you know, push push a lot of the stuff in the appendix. Okay. Well, maybe the grammar. Right? The Elvish grammar is dry.
But some of the story material there is good. Some of the story material there ended up in the movies after all. Right? Get those chips going. Yeah.
Go ahead, Anne Marie. Well, I think that's exactly the point. This book, you're writing a story, whereas you're writing history? And I think I mean, essentially, he is writing the history of of this tale right as it occurred to him in his mind. So I think it I think it's really hard to make this distinction.
Obviously, it's not real. Right? So it's not medieval history that he's writing, but I think it's more it's more scholarly than just a work of fiction. You know? I don't know if it can be and from that point of view, I think it makes sense to be writing it in this kind of quasi scholarly manner.
Did you you gonna say something? I just had a question. Yeah. He published The Hobbit before he wrote The Lord of the Ring? Oh, yeah.
Long before. Much to the ridicule of his colleagues, as you can imagine. Well, I I don't know if can't imagine. I mean, sort of, you know, take your average faculty member at MIT and then add another sort of, you know, 50 times factor of stuffiness. Right?
And and then you've got your, you your Oxford Don in the twenties, thirties, or forties. I mean, his colleagues weren't just kind of bemused. They were they were outraged. I mean, was deeply embarrassing. It was like having a nutcase, um, on your faculty because I mean after all, The Hobbit is a very has a very different cast to it, right, than The Lord of the Rings even though even though in some sense it's all one story.
Right? And often, children who are old enough to read The Hobbit will discover, much to their disappointment, that they're not the least bit interested in The Lord of the Rings because you've gotta get through that first, what, 60 pages before anything happens at all. Right? And that's not how you write a book for children, for sure. Yeah.
Annie. No? Okay. I never got I started reading Lord of the Rings and I never got through it. I loved The Hobbit, but couldn't deal with I just couldn't deal with the style of writing.
Is that still true? Yeah. Okay. Still uh-huh. It's I what I love about also CS Lewis is just the way he writes.
It just seems very A lyrical. It's it seems very flowing while while, uh, JR Token sort of write like, it to me, it's even more like a history stuff because and in fact, what he said in, um, how he wrote it, you know, pretending that this was something he was translating, I can see that a lot because, therefore, it sounds to me like he's trying to write a textbook almost that's sort of very dry Mhmm. And very textbook like, and Mhmm. More like writing history than writing a story. Yeah.
Go ahead, Ian. And I found, I think just just as CS Lewis is saying, and and kind of actually what I found about the discarded image as well is that he's it's interesting for its own merit. And if it isn't, then you're probably in trouble. And I mean, I personally found it very interesting because of what it's talking about. The Lord of the Rings.
Lord of Rings. Okay. Just wanna make sure. So as well as also, a lot of discarded image, felt it was the same way. He wrote in the, like, the very same.
He didn't really you know, he spent a lot of time talking about the examples and not and there was analysis, but it wasn't it all very defined in the examples. If you didn't find and I was talking to Craig about this, we didn't necessarily find some of the examples as compelling or as interesting as I did just because I'm interested in this kind of stuff. And just you know, it it wasn't as interesting. Just like he's saying the medieval authors, how they Mhmm. Mhmm.
I mean, one one thing just to make a note of, there's nothing per se that we can do about it, but we don't share the vast wealth of sort of immediately recallable references that these guys are carrying around in their heads. I mean, these two individuals and and others of their of their time in particular, but but these two especially are living in some other place. Right? I mean, they they just don't inhabit their everyday world all that much. For for Lewis, it's clear that, you know, Dante is much more real than, you know, than than the current government in Britain, right, at the time.
You know, that that's that's the set of references that inform his entire life. And there and there are set of references that, for the most part we don't have anymore. Or if we do, we've just picked them up on the edges. Right? We've read part of the Canterbury Tales, you know, in translation.
Right? We've read Dante, but in translation. We've read Beowulf again in translation. And and maybe we haven't even read all of those. We've just read one.
Right? Or or a smattering of of one. And it's it's hard to to even put ourselves into their sort of creative mental space. Right? Because the set of facts, the set of information, the set of ideas that we're carrying around are are not, you know, are not their set at all.
But, Annie, you were gonna say something? Was it you? Was it Anne Marie? No. No.
Okay. Let me change tacks for a minute completely, and I think we'll come we'll come back around to all of this. But let me try another comparison with something we've already read. So Broadal. One of the things that we were thinking about with Broadal was the impact, in his case, of the German prisoner of war experience.
Right? And maybe not a rejection of all that was modern, but certainly a longing, right, for something that was not modern, in his case, early modern. And a place, Right? A strong, strong attachment to place, which in his case was Mediterranean France. To the point where we even thought that we might wanna classify that book in one particular sense, right, as a love letter to that place and that time.
Would we wanna make similar arguments with, say, Middle Earth? Or I I should say, The Lord of the Rings. Go ahead, Miranda. Especially from the article where they they sounded a lot like him in sort of the well, what they you know, calling them sort of some dinosaurs for what they really wanted was to keep these old stories and old feelings. And yet because they were trying to keep these things alive, they were actually pioneers in a bunch of different ways.
Like, you know, they're one of like he says, you know, the first person to basically say, well, it's okay to talk about love as a historical thing, and by see for CS Lewis and some of the fantasy stuff, it's okay to write, you know Mhmm. Write fantasies that for adults for adults. And it's sort of I think the same thing happened with Rodell of that, you know, because that he sort of wanted to keep a hold of this old thing, this old fashioned feeling, yet he was also this pioneer of what of the way to do such a thing. Right. I mean, after all, um, the Mediterranean in the age of Philip the second is clearly a history book.
Right? And the Lord of the Rings is clearly in the bookstore under fiction. And there's no movie, right, for the Mediterranean in the age of Philip the second. Can you imagine the movie? And it would most certainly not be filmed in New Zealand.
Right? Not a chance. Yeah. Go ahead, Peter. Well, both I mean, we made the comparison with Bradell that he wasn't really living, you know, in his time frame.
Mhmm. I mean, both Lewis and Tolkien were World War I veterans, right? That's what I seem to remember. That's the only compare. I can't really speak from experience of reading books by Lewis and Tolkien, but it seems to me that the comparison between Barettl and Lewis and Tolkien would be that their experiences in war make them less willing to wanna live in The twentieth century.
Their time period, they're much more comfortable living somewhere else where Mhmm. You know, they can control what's going on. Although, I mean, this isn't quite as much the case with Broadal, but clearly with both Lewis and Tolkien, the mental world they're living in, it's full of war. Right? I mean, it's, you know, presumably, the horrors of the twentieth century don't shock them given the given the meant the the violence of the mental world that that that they're inhabiting.
Go go ahead, Anne Marie. Yeah. I think if you look at Lord of the Rings especially, you can see a lot of, I think, World War one influences in it. I think that book makes a the the reference to it, and I think I've heard other people talking about it as well. Like, you take the dead marshes Uh-huh.
Of people lying on their backs looking up. I mean, that's how you died when you were in a trench. And that's I mean, that's you can find other very similar analogies. So in a way, yes, I think we have them escaping to this world where they're in control, but still that world is dominated by memories that they can't leave behind even though they're escaping. So I think it's it's an interesting What we can say, Mona?
I was thinking it's an escape thing, but and they're creating this other world, and it would still be very heavily influenced by their war experiences. But another way, if since they keep on creating a cast, World War one was really, really shocking in general. I mean, it was horrible. Mhmm. But imagine if instead of the world that instead of if if in the world that we had been living, there had been all these big, huge, horrible wars before, World War one wouldn't have been as bad.
But there have been many horrible wars. There have been many horrible wars. Why I mean, an interesting question that that historians of the twentieth century are, you know, sort of endlessly, deeply fascinated by. Right? Is why why does World War one have this incredible cultural impact?
Right? Why why is I mean, historical experience, which, you know, after all, if we knew a lot about the Thirty Years' War, right, if you grew up in as a schoolchild in Germany, you would have been steeped in the Simplicimus literature, you know, that's a pretty miserable, awful book. And to read it in German is triply miserable and awful. So, I mean, Europeans had narratives for themselves of of other horrific moments that, you know, that upset, if you will, the very foundations of culture. And yet and yet World War One has played out, at least amongst the historians and the literary types, right, as this deeply unsettling experience.
And and I think we're, you know, we're seeing it played out in these middle of the century historians. Yeah. Go ahead, Miranda. I mean, I always learned that one of the major reasons why it was so dramatic was because they were basically trying to keep with the old fashioned warfare where, you know, you run at people from across the, you know, land. And Mhmm.
But this is a point when we're starting to get into machine guns and such like that. And so it was it was just this sort of absolute slaughter that was just pointless was the problem. Like, before then, you know, war sort of it wasn't, you know, didn't have that much point, but it just wasn't it's Yeah. I know. Wasn't this, you know, I've moved two inches and then I've died.
You know? Uh-huh. I move usually, you know, at least three, four feet. It wasn't didn't just A subtle distinction. It just it, like, killed off basically, like, an entire generation of people versus, you know, other wars where they kill off a lot and lot of people, but it wasn't one specific, you know, up and coming generation.
That may be the key piece. But go but go ahead, Nick. I was saying about two things in in Tolkien that Mhmm. Like, reflect on World War one. Like, the first one that's was actually done in the movie, and I don't remember it exactly from the book, but it definitely hits on things, is where, like, the Saruman character is talking about how there's this new age, and it's, like, the iron hand of the bork and Mhmm.
You know, machinery. Machinery. Mhmm. Exactly like World War one. It's almost like I feel like he's contrasting, like, World War one being, like, the, you know, the darker armies versus the, you know, the guys on horses and stuff.
Because, like, the thing you see with the guys on horses that there's heroes. There's, like, guys who, you know, individual achievement. And that in world World War one is, like, the one war in history that, like, I know a bit about. Yeah. I can't name a single hero from.
Like, I can't name a general. I can't The Red Baron. I think Red Baron. There you go. Yeah.
They're on horses. I thought Snoopy was the hero. Come on. Me too. Doesn't Snoopy take him down?
Yes. Yeah. Did you guys do you guys is that song still out there? Still know the song. Okay.
We're not gonna sing it, though. We later. Another flag. Okay. So let's think about heroes for a moment, because I think that is a critical piece to this.
Aside from the Red Baron, it may well have felt like there was nothing heroic about World War one. Ultimately, it was anti heroic. Okay. Now the heroic mode is one we recognize. They who I just happened to bring with me because I thought it might come in handy.
If I can find love, coincidentally. In yeah. Coincidentally. Okay. This is Beowulf with the dragon.
That that's the other thing. Right? It's one thing to be to go down, right, slaying the dragon, and it's another thing to be gunned down by machine gun fire, having gone only a few inches. Right? And we can say, gosh.
What difference does it make if you've gone 10 feet or a few inches? But maybe it does make a difference. But I mean, another another piece of it is is is class, I think, that I mean, World War one, the the boys from Oxford and Cambridge actually go, and they don't come back. And that that's felt very deeply. But hang hang on a second, Nick.
Okay. So here here is Beowulf getting ready to deliver the fatal wound. Once again, the king, that's Beowulf, gathered his strength and drew a stabbing knife. He carried on his belt sharpened for battle. He stuck it deep in the dragon's flank.
Beowulf dealt it a deadly wound. They had killed the enemy. Courage quelled his life. That pair of kinsmen, partners, and nobility had destroyed the foe. So every man should act, be at hand when needed.
This is Wiggloff who comes to Beowulf's aid and, um, at the last moment when he's been deserted by everyone else. Okay. So this so every man should act, be at hand when needed. But now for the king, this would be the last of his many labors and triumphs in the world, and then we have the wound starting to ooze and do all of the things. And then Beowulf has to have his dying speech, right, because heroes get to have dying speeches, but boys being killed by machine guns obviously don't get to have dying speeches, which is a problem.
Now is the time when I would have wanted to bestow this armor on my own son, had it been my fortune to have fathered an heir and live on in his flesh. For fifty years, I ruled this nation. No king of any neighboring clan would dare face me with troops. None had the power to intimidate me. I took what came, cared for, and stood by things in my keeping, never fomented quarrels, never swore to a lie.
All this consoles me, doomed as I am and sickening for death. Because of my right ways, the ruler of mankind need never blame me when the breath leaves my body for murder of kinsmen. Go now quickly, dearest Wiggloff, under the gray stone where the dragon is laid out, lost to his treasure. Hurry to feast your eyes on the hoard. Away you go.
I want to examine that ancient gold. Gaze my fill on those garnered jewels. My going will be easier for having seen the treasure, a less troubled letting go of the life and lordship I have long maintained. Okay. So he's dying, and he's worried one because he doesn't have a son.
He was king for fifty years. Well, he could have done something about that presumably, but it didn't occur to him until this moment. And moreover, he wants Wiggloff to quick run back to the dragon's lair and get some of the treasure and bring it back so he can see it. Seems maybe to be a silly way to us to spend your dying moments. Right?
But it's part of that it's part of that heroic mode. Right? The whole point of of dying in this way, the whole point of it is that you've killed the dragon and you've in fact inherited his treasure now. It's true. You're gonna die any moment.
But you've got the treasure. Right? All of that fits perfectly into into a, if you will, a classically heroic mode. Right? And we and we know we know this kind of medieval literature, and we're fairly comfortable with it.
The movie industry is made up of this kind of medieval stuff. Right? It's not made up of the Caroline Walker Bynum kind of stuff. Right? I mean, can you imagine the great movies of, you know, saintly women wasting away day by day slowly, you know, in penitence to God?
It just right? There's no plot. There's no excitement. There's no drama. Um, there would only be all of these disturbing questions, and nobody would pay money to go see it.
A reconciliation with her husband. Stay tuned. The priests take away communion. Yeah. Right.
That will happen. Right. There would be torture. Right? There would be torture.
That's true. And some people might go in for that. But it would be a small audience. Right? Of a very of a very particular kind of event.
The Passionate of the Price is selling pretty good. Yeah. Passionate the Price I mean, Stigmata sold pretty good when it came through theaters. That was that was know? That was a joke.
Alright. Alright. We don't wanna overstate the case, but but clearly, there's still a difference in accessibility. Right? Okay.
But now, let's think about The Lord of the Rings. If the heroic mode is part of what appeals, Who is the hero in The Lord of the Rings? Frodo. Frodo. And Sam actually, Sam is the hero.
My bad. Okay. Okay. Antiheroes, so to speak. Yeah.
What kind of heroes are they? I mean, how does the book end? I mean, there's there's Aragorn. Yeah. There is Aragorn.
Who is it? Yeah. He gets the he gets the girl in the end. The girl in the kingdom. Yeah.
Okay. That's in the heroic mode, but But Throde's world is lost. Like he says it, some wounds never heal. Like, he rescues the world for everyone else, but he couldn't rescue it for himself. So so where should I mean, if this book was in the heroic mode, shouldn't we have ended with Aragorn getting the girl in the kingdom?
Well, how about how about, like, Niamh Beowulf's death? Right? That's that's for Frodo's Frodo's dying in the in the sense that, you know, he's going on to the other land where he's going to die. Mhmm. Yeah.
He's kind of getting up and moving on from this world, having performed this great deed, saved everything for for everyone else. But Beowulf, I think, takes us in something where it's, you know, he's done this great deed, and it's for other people also. But it's also for him. Like, he's done this, and, you know, he gets the gold afterwards. So he's gotten what he's wanted.
You know? Yeah. He's gonna die, but he's gotten what he's wanted. And he gets the praise. Gets the praise.
Well Right. Know, Frodo's lost both what he wanted the praise. Like, he gets he saves the world, but he doesn't save, you know, what he really wanted to save. He doesn't so he doesn't really get what he wants. He doesn't get really get the praise.
Well, go ahead, Emily. But I think there's two really important distinctions to draw. Like, first of all, Beowulf gets the treasure. Right? Frodo spends the whole book trying to get rid of the treasure.
Mhmm. And secondly, Beowulf is an aristocrat. Beowulf is a king. He's a man of distinction. Frodo is hobbit.
He's he's of no importance at all in in global affairs. He has no family lineage. He's not he's not the archetypical medieval hero. He's he's no he's no blue blood. So I think it's there's some really important distinction.
Where I think the Christian part comes in, kind of. It's a bit like the whole, like, underdog. Right? You have the person that no one else would choose taking on the task. Right?
Like Mhmm. Mary and Joseph. Like, they get chosen even though they're at the bottom of the barrel, so to speak, and it's always the bottom of the barrel. Right? This is, like, the theme throughout Christianity.
Well, that's our women, right, who are engaged in these, if you will, anti heroic feats of starvation and self mutilation and whatever else. Right? They are they are God's ultimate agents precisely because they are low. And it's unexpected. Yeah, Ben.
I don't know. I just wanted to say that, like, to me, The Lord of the Rings isn't just like, Frodo isn't the main hero. Because, like, after the first book, The Fellowship, it's all it would, like, ever since I read it, it's always been two books. Like, it was Frodo and Sam. Like, it may be you can split this up into two books.
Right. One's Frodo and Sam in both and the other one's, like, Aragorn, Gimli, and Mhmm. All the else or everyone else. And so it was always like, yeah, there was the antiheroes, Frodo and Sam. But in the book, there there was still a complete book that was made up of the heroes and all the hero kind quests and that sort of stuff.
I agree with you. But Tolkien puts his cards on the table by how he ends. Right? Mhmm. When when I first read this to my own kids, and and, you know, of course, too young to properly appreciate it, but, you know, couldn't wait.
They wanted more or less to stop reading when Aragorn gets crowned. And that going back to the Shire business, who even wants to read that? Could we just skip that part? Well, okay. But there's a totally different sensibility at that point.
Right? But I think that Tolkien is when you choose to have two stories running in parallel and you ultimately decide that one of them gets the last word, well, that's the one that gets the last word. I mean, I think you're think you're making a powerful statement there. We could argue about it. I mean, that's but that's how I would read that.
I don't I don't know who was next. Miranda? I guess, um, well, two things. One was I think, though, what they said in the article fit more was the whole idea of the unsung hero of the World War one and how this sort of this person who, you know, has done a lot of this work just comes back and is, you know, going, look what I've done, and everyone just so has just basically pushes any of this trying to push any of the thought away doesn't really give any of the praise. Mhmm.
I also try to remember because I've I've heard I haven't read the last one at all that, in fact, in the movie that they cut out a bunch where, like, someone had you know, of going back to the Shire where he'd, in fact, some and had taken over the Shire and Mhmm. Looted it and stuff like that. Mhmm. They specifically cut that out of the movie because people would not be able to deal with something like that. You know?
That is it was already three and a half hours long or something like that. But yeah. They filmed that part. But no. Yeah.
But the Shire got taken over in the very first book. I mean, like, when they left, it when that was when it they first all those They should they yeah. There's discouraging of the Shire. Yeah. Yeah.
Go ahead, Amarah. But I think to get back to this, like, hero discussion, so this book had such a massive appeal in forties or fifties or whenever it was published because it empathized with this unsung hero of World War one. Sure. But then why does it have such a wide appeal to us now? And I think I'd like to make the contention that it has such a wide appeal because, like, in today's society, we don't really have heroes anymore.
And we have to invent them either. Like, we we we look for them in fiction because what's, like, the hero today? Like, Michael Jordan. You know? Like, we it's athletes.
There's no what's the societal hero today? Like, we really don't we don't really go around You said that with such contempt. Was wonderful. Like, it it's it's really striking. Like, who do little children look up to?
I don't know. I don't I have no idea who's next. Mona, Peter, Ian. How about that? I I do know my mom first read Tolkien and Mhmm.
All those things, like, when she was in her twenties. Mhmm. And when she first gave me the book, was like, know, when I first read these, ended up living in Middle Earth for about ten years. For for at least for that generation, for the sixties, seventies, their their the main appeal of the book was that he created such a real world to them that they could actually imagine it being real. Mhmm.
That it be that it became part of their lives. And that's why it it wasn't the heroes. It wasn't it wasn't the human part that made that that made them believe in the world so much. It was all the other it was all the things that weren't didn't don't actually exist. The hobbits and all these things actually I know they don't really exist, but they did exist in people's minds.
Mhmm. He create he created a history that may have been completely fiction, but it became but in a lot of people's minds, it became true because it I think in part because of when we went back rather than he wrote it like a history text. Mhmm. And I mean, one of the things that's going on here is the power of an exceedingly gifted writer. Oh, I'm I know.
Right? It's it's a contrast. Remember, we read the unredeemed captive? Mhmm. Or yeah.
And I actually said that it was a fictional story that happened to be true. It was in the way it was written. This is a this is a a fictional story. I mean, this is a historical text that happens to be Fiction. Right.
Okay. I mean, I think that's actually I think that's actually something Tolkien would have been very happy to hear. I don't even remember what I said. Peter, were you next? Okay.
Can't really speak of Tolkien as I said. But getting back to the hero discussion. Mhmm. I mean, after World War one, you had you do have the invention of heroes. If you look at World War two, which is right before when, I guess, The Lord of the Rings comes out in Mhmm.
Fifties maybe? Early fifties. Mhmm. Who are the heroes on the covers of America? You have, you know, Rosie the Riveter.
Is she a real person? No. She's this, you know, person that's been created as a as a sort of this is what you should be like. This is your hero. Don't You you don't have real life heroes anymore.
You have in the Soviet Union, you have people create I mean, it's a different culture. I mean, it's a different political culture, but you have, like, an enemy at the gates, which is based on a true story. You have I mean, they really pump up Vitalisatia as, you know, he is the hero of this war, but nobody would have heard of him if he's not, you know, without propaganda. So I think that the creation of a hero in a society where the heroes are lacking is part of the appeal. If I had read this book.
Yeah. Okay. I mean, it's it's a good point. The heroes are amalgams. Amalgamations.
That's what I wanna say. Of of lots of people who fit a type. And so in some sense, right, Frodo and Sam are the quintessential friendship team. Honorable, true, steadfast, loyal. They don't have to be Frodo and Sam real.
They just have to be sort of the Frodo Sam friendship type. And they can be heroic, um, without being individuated. I don't know if I'd wanna stretch that too far. I think, Ian, you were next. Um, I just wanna make a comment.
I I think it's kind of funny that the part that he invented that that he didn't take from medieval text was the the the underdog, the unlikely hero. Mhmm. And that's the part that that has lived on the most from his works. Because everything I read so many fantasy books when I was when I was a kid. Mhmm.
And they're all about, you know, generally about when they're written for kids, some young person who Yeah. You know, something something that should do some extraordinary chance, you know, they save the world. Right. And that's what they're all about. Right.
And and because I mean, I guess that that's I think part of why it has so much appeals because anyone can put themselves in their shoes in it. Mhmm. That makes me wonder why to the medievals that that didn't that didn't come about already. Why was Beowulf the to a peasant or or I guess a peasant wouldn't be reading, but he's hearing it. You know?
Like, even someone who would be told this story Yeah. Why is that so inspiring if you're never gonna be able to do it? You know? I'm never going to be like Beowulf because of who I am. Well, maybe your expectation isn't that you're the one who's gonna do it.
The story is appealing because somebody is gonna take care of you. That's what I mean, I I mean, why is Beowulf great? Right? Okay. He goes first to, uh, to the land of the Danes to rescue them from their little monster problem, kills Grendel.
Then it turns out there's Grendel's mother. Right? And she has to be dealt with. So he goes to the depths of the sea and fights Grendel's mother. Right?
Somehow, amazingly, not needing oxygen for an extended period of time while fighting. Sword. And swinging a club and all this other stuff. Okay. Right?
And then he comes back to Hrothgarve and says, look. Okay. Monster problem solved. And he is he is gifted. Right?
That is the gifts of gold and so forth that are due to the warrior who has who has, um, proved himself in battle are all are all given. And and Hrothgar is actually a little nervous that Beowulf's gonna want more, but he doesn't. Okay. I'm ready to go now. Back to the land of the Geats.
Right? He heads home and his uncle is still king and he reports what he's done and his uncle basically says, excellent. Right? That's what you should be doing. Um, and and sure enough, when his uncle passes on, Beowulf is made king.
Then we fast forward fifty years to the second main part of the narrative, and we have now Beowulf's little monster problem, turns out to be the dragon. Right? The dragon is disturbed because somebody steals a cup, some dingbat who doesn't know that, you know, you steal a dragon cup, excuse me, from a sleeping dragon, and they're gonna know about it. Right? Because they know where every last piece of their hoard is and what it looks like and what it smells like and what it feels like.
And if you take something from a dragon, even if he doesn't see you do it, he's gonna know all about it. And our friend, the peasant, who steals the cup from him doesn't know this, and then he presents himself to Beowulf and says, guess what? You have a problem. I've upset a dragon. Right?
And so Beowulf then has to go and fight dragon. If you're a peasant, you don't necessarily want to be Beowulf. Right? It's not a good job description. In fact, doom is certain.
We know that from the very beginning of the poem. And we're told over and over and over and over again. Right? Beowulf's day is coming. And and I actually wanna read a little bit past that passage that I read to you before because because it's easy to think of Beowulf as the hero, but the anti hero is here also.
What came about brought to nothing the hopes of the one who had wrongly hidden riches under the rock face. First, the dragon slew that man among men who in turn made fierce amends and settled the feud. Famous for his deeds, a warrior may be, but it remains a mystery where his life will end when he may no longer dwell in the mead hall among his own. So it was with Beowulf when he faced the cruelty and cunning of the mound guard. That's the dragon.
He himself was ignorant of how his departure from the world would happen. The highborne chiefs who had buried the treasure declared it until doomsday so accursed that whoever robbed it would be guilty of wrong and grimly punished for their transgression, hasp in hell bounds in heathen shrines. Yet Beowulf's gaze at the gold treasure when he first saw it had not been selfish. There's a lot of complicated stuff going on in this passage, but the gist of it is it remains a mystery where Beowulf's life will end. This is a little bit anti heroic.
I mean, all, he is going to die looking on that treasure. He's got the treasure, but not for long. And and in fact, the wailing woman at the very end of the poem, her lamentation is, we're doomed because now all the other feuds that have been kept at bay because Beowulf was so big and strong are now all gonna resurface. Right? The Swedes are gonna be coming because of this old feud, and the Danes are gonna be coming because of that old feud.
Right? And we're doomed. Without Beowulf, we're all going to die. So in fact, the final note of this is I think ultimately much more depressing even than the final note of the Shire, uh, which is that Frodo has to leave. Right?
But it has been saved for everybody else. Yeah. Miranda. Yeah. I mean, I understand what's the underdog thing with, you know, like, there's a lot of fantasy stuff where, you know, there's the underdog and you wanna be them.
But do you really wanna be Frodo? I mean, you see what happens to him, not just, you know, all he does is go, you know, he doesn't get anything good with, you know, all he does is go through torments, go through pain, go you know, he doesn't have anything good along this at all. And so it's sort of not really someone you want to be. The other problem I have is I've heard the story of, know, well, don't have heroes nowadays ever anymore. Uh-huh.
How much did they have heroes back then either? I mean, there's, you know, god is the, you know, a hero, but is it always, you know, the hero is something that's past? You know? There's always something you know, there's Beowulf as the hero. Is there really you know, at the time of Beowulf, were there, you know, kings that were thought of as you are the hero, you are completely, you know, stuff like that.
They were saying. Like, has there always been, you know, well, there's no heroes of our time. There's only fictional ones. Mhmm. I mean, the king used to get on his horse and lead his troops into battle.
Mhmm. In the Thirty Years' War, I mean, Gustavus Adolphus led the Swedish troops and he tied, you know, in battle. He didn't die in battle. Did it. Jernon did it.
Wait. Didn't he die in battle? No. Well, he died during battle. He won but see, he won his battle Yeah.
And then he sort of meandered off into the woods from the camp later that day and got killed in the woods. So that's kinda like dying in battle, but not exactly. I I went to Sweden. There's statues of him. Mean, he's venerated.
Absolutely. But I mean Absolutely. During the warfare was different back when, you know, Kingsley Crusades, you know, I'm gonna, you know, the the war of the roses, you know, you got. No. For sure.
I mean, Charlemagne campaigned against the Saxons for thirty straight summers, and he did it. Yeah. Right? For thirty straight summers. Even just a national guard.
So And he was a tall guy too. I think, Annie, you made this point a little earlier, but at some point, we have to get the Christianity back in. Right? Because that, obviously, in in Beowulf, that's a critical piece. Right?
The author of the poem, the text, is Christian. The text is is a presumably oral tradition story that is not Christian. There's no ambiguity. Beowulf isn't ever misunderstanding himself to be a Christian. Right?
He's very clear about who he is. But the author of the poem, our writer, is a Christian. And so this tension is just present all the way throughout. Uh, and and clearly for Tolkien and Lewis both, their their intense experiences with Christian theology. Right?
And in Lewis's case, I mean, really intense. You know, he's I mean, half of his output is apologetics. Right? He's not just a, you know, kind of an accidental Christian. He's a really serious serious one.
I mean, and so and so is Tolkien, but but not in the sense that he's actually writing apologetics. But but for both of these men, whatever it was they were picking up from the past then had to be tempered by by what they believed to be truth, right, with a capital t. You know, getting back to that math problem. And and let me let me read you one other source that you probably don't just sort of have rolling around in your head that has to do with this problem of the warrior. This is the Venerable Bede, as they call him, his Ecclesiastical History of the English People.
It's a early eighth century text to be a little bit ahead of the probably, depending on how we date Beowulf, a little bit ahead of the writing of Beowulf, but, you know, in that in that Anglo Saxon world. And this is Bede's story about how Edwin of Northumbria is converted to Christianity. Okay? So Edwin holds a council. The king answered, when he's he's listening to a priest, that it was his will as well as his duty to accept the faith that Polinus, that's the priest, taught.
But said that he must first still discuss the matter with his principal advisors and friends. Right? So this is the Anglo Saxon mode. He's gotta call his things together. They're gonna talk about this.
So I'm persuaded that's all well and good, but we're not gonna be Christians unless we're all gonna do it together. The Clovis conversion story is exactly the same, um, if you've read Gregory of Tours' History of the Franks. Okay. So that if they were all in agreement, they might all be cleansed together in Christ. Paulinus agrees.
The king keeps his promise. He summons the council. Okay. And he asks them, what do you think of this strange doctrine and this new way of worshiping the godhead that is being proclaimed to us? Kofi, the chief priest, replied without hesitation.
Now this is quite a wild speech thinking this is the pagan chief priest, mind you. Your majesty, let us give careful consideration to this new teaching, for I frankly admit that in my experience, the religion that we have hitherto professed seems valueless and powerless. None of your subjects has been more devoted to the service of our gods than myself, Yet there are many to whom you show greater favor, who receive greater honors, and who are more successful. Now, if the gods had any power, they would surely have favored myself, who have been more zealous in their service. Therefore I love the therefore.
You know, it all just follows logically. If on examination you perceive that these new teachings are better and more effectual, let us not hesitate to accept them. Okay. You know, we're all thinking, yeah, that's a likely story. Okay.
Another of the king's chief men signified his agreement with this prudent argument and went on to say, your majesty, when we compare the present life of man on earth with that time of which we have no knowledge, it seems to me like the swift flight of a single sparrow through the banqueting hall where you are sitting at dinner on a winter's day with your fangs and counselors. In the midst, there is a comforting fire to warm the hall. Outside, the storms of winter rain or snow are raging. The sparrow flies swiftly in through one door of the hall and out through another. While he is inside, he is safe from the winter storms.
But after a few moments of comfort, he vanishes from sight into the wintry world from which he came. Even so, man appears on earth for a little while, but of what went before this life or of what follows, we know nothing. Therefore, again, the logic is impeccable. If this new teaching has brought any more certain knowledge, it seems only right that we should follow it. I mean, it's a it's a fabulous story.
Whether you believe that Edwin really threw a council and this is what these guys just spontaneously said, I don't know. But it parallels the Beowulf ending really well. Right? What's gonna happen when you pass out of your mead hall and into the world you don't know about? Right?
And in that world, everything is uncertain and totally anti heroic. Right? Whatever you've achieved here, whatever monsters you've defeated, whatever dragons you've slain, ultimately they amount to nothing because you have no idea what's gonna happen next. Now think about think about these sort of you know, these are proper historical documents. Right?
Written by Anglo Saxons. Now think about an improper historical document. Let's stick with Tolkien for a moment. Where, I mean, where in his imaginative world do those kinds of Anglo Saxon narratives fit? I mean, for for men for For men and hobbits, it's the same thing.
They don't know really what happens after they die. I mean, they and then in the very same manner. And and I think that that goes on with in after their you know, after they didn't know what happened after they defeats on. They had no idea what life would be like. And so Frodo is What what about for Frodo?
What's different about Frodo? I was gonna say another Christian parallels. He gains the whole world and then, like, throws it away. He'll hold, like, all the power, gives it up for everyone else. Okay.
Sorry. I had to talk to my husband. That's not that's not related to They What were my questions? Okay. But how does it end?
Frodo goes into the West. Yeah. He goes into the West. But where the elves came from. But is it is it really unknown?
No. Is the West really no. It's not unknown at all. But but beyond it is is the thing because they go there, and then but he's going to die there. And then from there, he where he goes from there, they have no idea.
So they go to the halls? Well, but then from the halls of Mandos, the the humans and the hobbits go somewhere and they don't know. Going with? Who's he going with? Gandalf, Dragos.
The elves. Yeah. Okay. He's going yeah. And all the other people who are blessed.
Okay. He's going with the elves to to what? Wait. What's the distinguishing hallmark of the elves? The indignments.
They live forever. Yeah. He's that is not totally clear. Yeah. Actually, is true.
That is not the undiagnosed. There is an implication that he's not that he the reason he's going is that he doesn't have to die for the shadow. That's right. That's funny. This is funny.
Yeah. The first time my sister read it, actually, what she thought, she came to me crying at the end of this book, and she was in tears. She said Anne Marie and I I haven't read it. She said Anne Marie, they all go to commit suicide. They're the hurricane.
That's what that's what she understood. Uh-huh. Going into the boats and going out into the West to hurry. Was like, They can make the suicide. The analogy that it's it's like living living closer to the sun that that that you're going to that you're you're a candle living closer to the to the flame that you burn faster, that you would even die that a mortal would would even Okay.
But but Ian I don't know. I'm I'm I'm thinking at stupid little things. Okay. No. No.
No. No. No. Don't don't don't ever shut up. That's fine.
Just think before you talk. K. If I'm going off admittedly into a kind of unknown Yes. But I'm going with a group of people who are totally kind, nice, gentle, beautiful. Right?
Gorgeously drop dead beautiful. And a lot of them have been there? And and they're not gonna die. And they all sing beautiful music and play harps and right? I mean, this isn't a scary prospect.
No. I mean, it's no scarier, for instance, than, say, being a Christian and not quite knowing what heaven is all about, but knowing it's okay because I'm going there, and god is there, and god is purely good. So I'm okay. I don't have to know exactly what's gonna happen. Mhmm.
Because it's gonna be pleasant. Because I'm in good company. And wherever they're taking me, I'm gonna be okay. Okay. So let's go back and think again.
Beowulf, he dies. He's got the chalice, you know, or whatever, the bit of the treasure. He's looking on it. He's gazing on it. He's done all the things.
Right? He can't be accused of murdering a kinsman. And after all, 90% of these guys could be. So right? He's, you know, he's going off with a clean conscience, and yet and yet he has no idea where he's going or what's gonna happen.
Frodo doesn't have that ending at all. Right? Yeah. Go ahead, Ben. But, um, you you said something.
I I haven't read it all the way through the parts of it. But, um, you said something about, uh, the wailing woman at the end talking about how all this stuff can happen now. Isn't that sort of like how, you know, like, the heroes are leaving Miller or, like, the elves are leaving Miller with Gandalf, you know, Frodo? And isn't there still that uncertainty? Or, I mean, I know the bad guys are dead now.
But But there's there's always more bad guys. Yeah. But there's that uncertainty for, like, the people that are left. Like, you know, how the book doesn't end just with them going up. It ends with Sam coming back and saying, well, I'm back.
Except that Sam is what? Four time mayor and he has children? Right? You think it's insignificant that Sam is busy getting married, having children, having grandchildren? No.
We're supposed to feel good about that. I'm I'm not saying we're we're not, but we're still And Aragon is also he's gonna die. Yes. And even Arwen is gonna die because she's chosen that, but it's oak it's bittersweet. But it's not tragic.
It's bittersweet. Right? And and, yes, the the age of men that is being left behind by wizards and elves, yes, they're gonna face perils. Absolutely. There will be dangers in the road ahead, But they are not doomed by any means.
Right? We can feel at the end like things are kind of in good hands. Right? Mary and Pippin are gonna live to a ripe old age. They're gonna serve their respective feudal overlords as knights, basically.
Right? And the age of men will proceed with its ups and downs, but they're doing the right kinds of things. They're having children. Right? Beowulf again has no child.
That's what he laments at the end. He's going into the unknown and he's not even leaving someone behind. Right? It's a very, very different cast to the ending. Even though the Lord of the Rings feels kind of anticlimactic at the end, I think, to a lot of readers and obviously to movie makers.
But nonetheless, that that is a hopeful ending. Whereas the Beowulf ending, it is not a hopeful ending at all. It's not just that maybe the Swedes will come. For sure they're coming. They're in their boats already.
Right? They've heard. The dragon has killed Beowulf. Excellent. Got rid of that guy.
We can go in now and and reopen that feud that we've had to put on hold for fifty long years because he was king and so powerful. It's certain that they're coming, whereas you just don't have that kind of despair, um, at the end. Yeah. Go ahead, Mona. Before I start making a point, just is there any other chance of b five here?
Because if there isn't, my point will make no sense. B five? I don't know what is. I don't even know what it is. Okay.
Never mind. I won't make the point. We can move on. Okay. Another fantasy.
Talking of endings Yes. Endings. Can we can we speak a little bit about the ending of this process? Where would you like to go? He says Are you in the epilogue or the influence?
In the influence. Page two fifteen. Okay. There you go. Two last two sentences.
And now in some extreme form of behaviorism, the subject himself is discounted as merely subjective. We only think that we think. Having eaten up everything else, he eats himself up too. I'm very confused. And where we go from that is a dark question.
That's what that's what that's what Cantor is rebelling against when he says Lewis is mopey and pessimistic and but really, Cantor's just jealous. Doesn't that I mean, that really that reflects a lot on Lewis' fictional writings. I mean, Lion, Witch, War the entire Narnia series has a really, really dark overtones that are Oh, but it's so nice. No. No.
Aslan says everyone, and The candy. The last book is really dark. Both really dark. Orders. Yeah.
It's really both really dark, and yet it's also, like it's be it's the same sort of feeling of we don't know where we're going, but we think it's gonna be better. Like, everyone all the good people are going there, but we're not exactly sure where we're going. It's we're Yeah. We're destroying something that's really wonderful. Narnia goes away.
Yeah. But we're going to create sort of a new narnia. And this is a question but we don't exactly know for sure if this new Narnia is gonna be that wonderful. And so the it's sort of a weird it's the same sort of weirdness in the Beowulf type of feeling that to destroying this old I mean, one thing has to be said. The seventh book in the Narnia series is by far the most poorly written.
Mhmm. And I think that's part of the problem. And I'm I'm I'm I'm willing to, uh, say that the reason What was the time to the book? The Battle. The Last Battle.
It's by far the most poorly written. I mean, when Cantor says that the Narnia series is uneven, I think that is fair. In a way that the Lord of the Rings is, you know, reliable from start to finish. And if you read the Beowulf and the critics and the monsters and the critics, you'll you'll see that same just sort of incredible penetrating pen at work. You know, every sentence is just packed.
But I wanna come back to Anne Marie's question. What's going on here? Um, so let's put it into a context. Right? And not just jump in at that last paragraph.
He has made the argument that we're into originality and that distinguishes us from what came before us. And in fact, we're so into originality that we've gone even like a step beyond that. Right? And so it's not just that we think we've added something, but maybe we're not even real. We only think we're real.
Okay? So that as In the medieval mind, he says nothing is subjective. Right? I don't see the part I'm playing in this at all. Then some process of modernization happens.
Right? We'll pass over that without explicating it at all. And in that process of modernization, we become more cognizant of what we're adding. But we become so cognizant of what we're adding that that we can actually become just. I think therefore I am is a stage in that process.
Right? And now it's I think I am, so maybe I am. Right? But only because I think I am. There's something troubling about that and I don't think that Lewis' assessment of things is totally accurate.
I think his reading of the Middle Ages is more reliable than his reading of his own times. But what he's saying here at the end is, if that's true if that's true, we've eaten up everything else and all we have left is to eat ourselves. Right? And that is his dark question. And I think when Cantor says that Lewis has this kind of despair, right, this dark cast of things he's really picking up on the very end of this book.
But I think in general I don't agree with Cantor's assessment. There's there's one more thing that I that I absolutely wanna do because I sent you these pages, and of course, I sent them to you in such a way that you could not read them. But but there's but there's sort of one more piece to the Tolkien story that I want wanna go back to Broadal. I wanna go back to World War two and what all these all these sort of cataclysmic political events that are happening. Okay.
Miranda, you're gonna derail me. Yeah. Yeah. I guess I won't you know it's another derailing thing of of one of the things I'd always heard against Tolkien is the whole, you know, well, is he sexist in terms of not having there's not a very, strong woman character or anything like that. But then, you know, you read, well, he had a wonderful wife that he loved dearly and children and stuff like that instead And four children, incidentally, not the three that Cantor says.
I'm not sure which one of his children Cantor got rid of. But it's kind of a serious flaw if you're writing a biography of someone, I think, to get rid of one of their children. But anyway, that's an aside. But that, like, I think I'm wondering if that's a lot more picking up on the medieval stuff that there would be, you know, there's women, but they're sort of on the side type of they're not really at all part of, like, you know, nowadays, you're like, well, we need to have, you know, the woman, the, you know, the guy, the Yeah. Okay.
There's a huge literature on this, and we won't we won't go there because I actually have somewhere else I wanna go, and we don't have enough time to do both. Um, but let me just say this, uh, Tolkien's world is utterly masculinist one. It is also a violent one. It is perfectly possible to write a good feminist critique of all of this and say, look at that masculinist world and how violent it is. Right?
Tolkien, if pressed on this, would say, you're right. Absolutely. It's a violent world. That is the world that I know. This is in fact the world of sin.
Right? This is the fallen world. It is violent. And to the extent that we can mitigate that violence in whatever way, but maybe also in the way of female influence, that's a good thing. Now, if you've got sort of Beowulf running in your head from start to finish, you know that in that Anglo Saxon world, female peacemaking doesn't work.
We have at least three separate episodes in the Beowulf larger narrative of specific references to attempts to use women. In fact, they're called, like the queen, the Danish queen is called a peace weaver. Three or four times she's called that a peace weaver. And yet we know it doesn't work because they're constantly feuding with each other, the lay of Inggeld, which is embedded in there. Inggeld is married off to a woman who is the daughter of his enemy, and the idea is it's supposed to make peace.
What does it do? Well, in fact, he ends up in the completely intractable situation of trying to decide whether he should kill his wife's father or his own brother. Right? And, you know, great, you lose both ways. So Tolkien would acknowledge, I think, freely that his world is a totally masculine one and that it's violent.
But he would also say, look, read the sources. Read Beowulf. It'll tell you women aren't gonna solve this problem. Okay. So I'm gonna leave it at that.
Okay. But I wanna go back to war. As you know, Beowulf is a sort of a not about an Anglo Saxon, but nonetheless speaks to Anglo Saxon culture. It is after all written by an Anglo Saxon in the Anglo Saxon language. Tolkien specifically responded on numerous occasions to critics who pooh poohed it.
You may know that it was considered to be a totally inferior text for a long time, basically because it had been written by some beer swilling Anglo Saxon. So this is this is Tolkien's response to this. This is from actually, let me let me read his actual response from the from the the essay Beowulf and the Critics, and then I'm gonna read to you some some letters. Alright. He's talking about a French critic, Usurand.
The strange poem of Beowulf, he wanders on, the most important monument of Anglo Saxon literature, and then in parentheses, Tolkien has, the poor poet lifts his nose out of his beer horn and humbly acknowledges the gentleman's condescension. Like old Celtic tales is a medley of pagan legends, which do not concern Beowulf, the hero in particular, and of historical facts. New discrepancy is introduced in trying to adapt the old tale to the faith of his, the author's day. No need to expiate on the incoherence of a poem formed of such elements. Then in parentheses, Tolkien says, the poor poet here hastily hides his blushes in the beer horn again.
Its heroes now we're back to the French critic. Its heroes are at once pagan and Christian. They believe in Christ and Weeland. Deathly and complicated flabbergasted silence throughout the hall while a horrible suspicion crosses the poet's mind that the magnificent gentleman is an idiot. Anyway, this whole essay is like this, you know, 70 pages of this kind of sort of very biting criticism.
But the the racial issues that are implied in all of this, what it means to be Germanic, Teutonic, Norse, heroic, right, are fraught ones in the context of World War one and World War two, obviously. Right? What does it mean to have a Germanic hero that kills dragons and goes to the bottom of the sea? Right? Especially if you're an Englishman writing about a monument of your English past, an Anglo Saxon poem.
This is from a letter written in 1941 to his son Michael. I have spent most of my life since I was your age studying Germanic matters in the general sense that includes England and Scandinavia. There is a great deal more force and truth than ignorant people imagine in the Germanic ideal. I was much attracted by it as an undergraduate when Hitler was, I suppose, dabbling in paint and had not heard of it. In reaction against the classics, but no one ever calls on me to broadcast or to do a postscript, yet I suppose I know better than most what is the truth about this Nordic nonsense.
Anyway, I have in this war, that would be World War two now, a burning private grudge, which would probably make me a better soldier at 49 than I was at 22 against that ruddy little ignoramus, Adolf Hitler. Ruining, perverting, misapplying, and making forever accursed that noble northern spirit, a supreme contribution to Europe which I have ever loved, and tried to present in its true light. Nowhere incidentally was it nobler than in England, nor more early sanctified and Christian Christianized. This is a really powerful passage because Tolkien, with his German name, and his love of Germanic lore, and these heroes, and this masculinist culture, which he freely partakes in, is feeling the tension of being alive in 1941 and looking at what someone is doing with a quote Germanic ideal. Let me read from one more letter.
This actually is dated in 1938. So before the Sudetenland, back at a moment when people were still saying, 'hey, maybe we don't really know what's happening in Germany'. I think it's very telling. This is a letter that was written to a German publishing house, Leuningferlach, who were negotiating a publication of a German translation of The Hobbit, and they asked Tolkien if he was Irish, that is, are you Aryan? He replied, he was not aware sorry.
I am not aware that any of my ancestors spoke Hindustani, Persian, Gypsy, or any related dialects, and therefore cannot claim to be Aryan. However, if I am to understand that you are inquiring whether I am of Jewish origin, I can only reply that I regret that I appear to have no ancestors of that gifted people. The letter goes on for a space, and then it ends like this. I have been accustomed to regard my German name with pride and continued to do so throughout the period of the late regrettable war. That would be World War one.
I cannot, however, forbear to comment that if impertinent and irrelevant inquiries of this sort are to become the rule in matters of literature, then the time is not far distant when a German name will no longer be a source of pride. I just wanted you to have that because it is such a powerful testimony to understanding particularly the letter written in 1938 when lots of reasonable people said, 'Gosh, we had no idea what was coming. How could we possibly have known?' Clearly, Tolkien has a pretty good sense of what's happening. But I mean, I also wanted you to have that because it is easy to it is easy to to ridicule, that Germanic ideal, which clearly he lived, breathed, died. And it informs his fiction utterly.
And given the context in which it was written, could easily be misunderstood. Wanted to close with that because it takes us back one more time to Braudel, who also saw, if you will, the horrors of a particular way of thinking about race. And he faces race. I mean, after all, Tolkien is celebrating race in many ways. Braudel is effacing it by saying, you know, no, no.
What really matters is the mountains, the air, the earth, the camels, all these other things. It's not race. But both of them you can see, these are very intelligent men struggling with a world that is somewhat incomprehensible to them because it's gone mad in some very real sense from the way they think about things. And what they write in Tolkien it's fiction, in Braudel it's history, but that line is a fine one as we've already said, what they write then has to somehow deal with this problem that they're confronted with, which is that they live in this world gone mad, in particular over this question of race. And I just I wanted to close with that because, one, know, clearly Tolkien was a mensch, Right?
In the truest sense of that word. But but also because I I think it speaks to the kinds of intellectual influences that are, in this case, informing two very different genres, fantasy literature, on the least history, could you possibly get two different genres? And yet, kind of intellectual milieu that is motivating them is clearly very similar. Okay. End of sermon.
Do we have a rough sense of what we're doing for next week? Yeah. Don't mean I don't mean next week. Sorry. Yes, and you know, it's not clear to me how you should be responsible for doing that, but you'll figure it out.