And and so as you know, you you read a hodgepodge of things for today, um, and you can tell me just how hodgepodgey it was. Um, but but but Jeff is the, um, the the only one of my colleagues, either gullible enough or unbusy enough or something to, um, to join us. Um, and it might have been too much of a free for all if if Moore had. But but the idea is to think about, um, how history department works. So that's that's what we're gonna do.
But Anne Marie, do you wanna start us? You're our official starter today. Um, so I don't know what everybody read, but Oh, let's actually do that. Do that does everyone wanna go around and and ask? Well, we could just say We can write some raise hands.
Yeah. Okay. So how many of you read the John Dower? Okay. So we've got four of you.
And how many of you read the, uh, Coachman? Okay. But, again, it's a little over half. And, um, what else? Let's see.
The, um, Peter's piece in the Journal of Early Modern History on what is it called? Chinese Frontiers. Yeah. Empire and Nation in Comparative Perspective. I read it last term.
Yeah. Okay. So two of you have at least read it. Okay. That was really good.
I have to say. Um, how many of you read Meg's piece on Bring on the Meat? How about some meat? Okay. Again, about half of you.
And how about Harriet's Race, Breed, and Myth of Origin, the Chillingham Cattle. Skimmed. Skimmed. Okay. So a couple of you.
And then, um, the widows? A couple of you read okay. Good. So I think we're covered. Right?
And then and then I there was the there was the other piece that I had written with John Juredy that gave you a a another sense of sort of what's happening in the quantitative history field. Um, and I guess, what, two or three of you read that? Okay. Okay. So now, I think we're covered though.
Yes. We're covered. Okay. I think the easiest way to kind of try and talk about all these pieces was kind of to look at the way they analyze the data that they're concerned with because I think there's a lot of different methods at work here. Professor Ravel's and also professor Dauer, I think, are sort of more kind of what I traditionally regard as history when you take sort of an event or some sort of facts that you have and then the historian locates it in in the period and makes some kind of subjective conclusions.
But then the pieces we read by you are far more sort of quantitatively intensive and there's regressions and data and numbers. Heavens. You know, when when when when first look at that kind of a data the lines and tigers and bears. Yeah. I think when you when you look at historical data presented in that fashion, it often comes across as being more objective because it's it's kind of detached.
It's something analytical. It's something quantitative. So I was just curious what people think in terms of how the method that you choose in evaluating data kind of influences the conclusions that you draw and kind of how historians project their own kind of inferences on on the data they have. Go ahead, Ian. I read the the Not So Merry Widows.
And I really I thought that the data the fact that using, like, very quantitative data itself didn't necessarily add extra credibility, but what I thought was, you know, was very noticeable was the way you worked, like, turned a critical eye towards the data and conclusions you drew through that. And, I mean, I think that's something that so I guess what I'm saying is maybe it isn't wasn't so much the independent the fact that it was just using numbers and regressions and bears, oh my, but that it was like that it was you know, they were critical of how the data was being used. And well, know, but this you I drew this conclusion because of these numbers, but it could be misleading because when you determine the age of individuals, kind of an artifice to do that. I spent the first half of the paper wondering if that would make come up with anything abnormal because of that. Then you kind of answered that, uh, towards the middle end of the paper.
I spent about three months trying to decide if that was going to skew things. I'm not sure, Mona and then Peter. Um, from you, the other thing about the data was that you were very careful about talking about where you got your source from and how that itself might have skewed it a bit since it was only from families where both of the parents died. And even if they had died, like, it only talked about second marriages, if that second spouse had died as well, and stuff like that. So the fact that you were really critical about the source of your information also gave you a lot more credibility.
Let's hold on to that. I mean, we'll get you, Peter. But hold on to this idea of what it means to be critical about your sources, and and let's apply it to the the cultural history. And think about what it means to be critical about sources in some other context where it's not where maybe it's not so apparent. But before we do that, go ahead Peter.
Was gonna say the exact same thing. Oh, okay. So, for those of you who read the Coachman's Bare Rump. He was also very critical about the sources at the end of terms of well, both the sources, if you look, that he didn't just take the one first, um, the first thing that they got from the police reports. He went back and looked and there was a case report three weeks later about it.
That's completely different from the police report from the first one. And so it's sort of and so you have to take and so compare both of those and did actually look into what might have happened, why they sort of conflicted and such like that. Mhmm. K. Yeah.
Go ahead. But I think it's harder to be critical of sources when they're cultural like that. I think when you have numbers and hard data, I think it's I don't know. You don't need to bring so much opinion to it. What do you think, Jeff?
I think that's an interesting comment because in some ways, the cultural historians and the quantitative historians, well, sometimes they overlap, are quite mistrustful of each other. And I think there is an assumption amongst quantitative historians that anything that can't be quantified is much more problematic and open to skepticism. I think cultural historians suspect that numbers can be manipulated as easily as narratives and images in the service of biased history. Yeah. Go ahead, Mara.
And either way, even with both quantitative and the cultural stuff, you still have to you still, of course, look at what kind of skew the actual wherever you're getting the data from, like, for Like, for instance, the fact that it's from Harvard, but that the class of people who are giving the testimony does definitely change how it should be held and that kind of stuff. Okay. So if we were gonna think about these two particular I mean, one of the things that's interesting about these two pieces, and maybe Harriet's too, those are the three papers that that were in the pile that you could choose from that were the most narrowly focused on a sort of specific problem. So in my case, it's a specific question. Why do men remarry more often than women?
Right? And then, of course, there's a multitude of questions that come out of that, but it's that specific question. In Jeff's case, it's, wow. This guy's got a play thing going in his house, and it ends up, you know, in a police report. And what does that tell me about the individuals who are participants in the evening's festivities and then anti festivities?
What does it tell me about their social class? What does it tell me about theater going? What does it tell me about French politics, right, in the eighteenth century? I mean, you know, etcetera. But it comes out of this very specific thing.
In Harriet's case, you know, we've got these cattle that are being sort of projected as ancient, that aren't the least bit ancient, and why? Right? It's a very whereas the the the John Dower piece is very largely about how images of race get used. Right? It's a much bigger problem.
And Meg's piece on the meat is actually much more narrative. It's not focused around the question per se. Right? It's telling you a story about how, in this case, an agency kind of rises and falls. I guess, there's a there's there's there's definitely a, you know, they emerge on the scene and then they disappear.
And then and then Peter's is this huge, right, comparative analysis of of eighteenth century empire building, you know, around the world. I mean, it's primarily focused on Qing, Qing movements into the the Tibetan frontier. But, you know, he picks up the Ottomans and a whole European literature and all sorts of other stuff. Right? So those are much broader.
But if we if we go back for a minute to the three that are kind of case sensitive, we can we can ask questions about the historian's methodology in finding evidence often inadvertently. Right? Yours was inadvertent, wasn't it? Well, it's just the the first report is published in a nineteenth century collection of documents from this archive. And in the course of going through that for another project, I happened to assemble a process.
Inadvertent. Right. And mine is the same way. Um, I was doing something else in the archives of this particular orphanage and discovered that there were all these probate inventories that were lying around. And, in fact, my first response to that material was to write to my thesis advisor and say, hey, guess what I found?
This would be a great dissertation project for somebody. Why don't you suggest it to one of your students? And then like another year later, I think I talked to him again. So have you found anyone who wants to work with those probate inventories? And a year later, anybody want to work with them?
And finally, it dawned me, on oh, well, I guess I could go back and work with them. But, I mean, it has that kind of accidental find of something, which you then can think through. Well, what are questions that one might want to pose of this box of materials that have come to me somewhat inadvertently. Right? It's not that, you know, it's it's not that there was some agenda to ask those questions and then to go searching for data, but rather to sort of found data and realize that it opens up some interesting possibilities.
But, okay. So aside from how we come to these things, which is often quite accidental. And hopefully, you're gonna make this discovery in your own papers. Right? That you're gonna be reading away, and suddenly, there's gonna be material that that wasn't what you were looking for, but that in fact has all kinds of potential to say interesting things about about the world and the past and so forth.
But So so in these, if we're gonna think about sources, if we come to sources accidentally, uh, and we know that they weren't recorded in the first place for the purposes to which we are now about to put them in this in this setting of writing an article. Um, how can we evaluate methodology aside, right, be it cultural or quantitative? Right? How can we evaluate the veracity of the historian's interpretation or the legitimacy of the historian's interpretation? Mean, the policeman who comes to the Chevalier's villa or whatever.
Is it a villa? It's just a large luxurious house. Townhouse. Townhouse, let's say. Okay.
Yeah. He he has no he has no grand designs at all, right, to speak to the problems of race and class and social status, right, in Ancien Regime France. Right? So is it okay for Jeff to do that? Yeah.
Well, in a way, isn't it isn't it good that the policeman has no intentions to speak to class and social structures like that? Because that gives you an unbiased count on his part. Right? Initially, in the first part I mean, upon reading the second document, when they've covered it up, I think that's that's more speaking towards, at least, class structures in a way. But I think I don't so much see a problem with using a source that wasn't specifically addressing an issue you are trying to investigate as being legitimate.
I think depending on how broad the source is as well, because I mean you mentioned with the probate documents and the orphanage that they were broader than most probate documents. And you could ascertain the purpose for which they were written down. And it was broad enough that it contained within it. It shouldn't be lacking something important that would but, mean, I guess that is the big danger is to make sure that, you know, the police officer just isn't used to ignoring certain facts that you would assume that that he's but, I mean, know, and that's that's something that's kind of hard to I mean, and, again, maybe in the in terms of the probate, if if if they were, you know, just not used to writing down facts about people with a certain certain economic status, they're like, well, you know, that's that's obviously not a problem. I mean, it looks like you ascertained that that wasn't the case, that they actually did record everything.
But Mhmm. You know, it could have very well been. You found this document, and they were just omitting certain things because it wasn't important for them. Mhmm. So I guess you just need to you know, and I think it's even harder with the the police documents as well.
Or where it'll be a little Maybe harder, maybe easier, I'm not sure. But it just requires a lot of investigation in the nature of the source. If I could have had one other source if you as a reader would have liked me to have had one more source to add to the picture, complete the picture, complicate or confuse the picture, what would you have wanted me to have? What should I have fabricated in the archives? These are fabricated.
What would Natalie Davis have done? Let's just assume. There there was a a a fairly significant groundswell of anti Davis sentiment in this class that John John Demos' unredeemed captive came in as sort of higher on the veracity scale than than Davis. What what didn't you guys like about Natalie Davis' book? Did she read too much into the Leptron?
Characters without really making a distinction of when that was happening? Mhmm. Yeah. They just didn't trust her. Well, what would you guys want?
What would what would In in my piece or any of the other ones you read as well. I I don't know if this is exactly his class because I read the Dower. Mhmm. I'm actually taking this class too, so it's kinda interesting because I basically heard the lecture on that Monday. Uh-huh.
And Good timing. Yeah. I really thought that the piece could have used a couple of the graphics he used in class to substantiate what he was saying because the graphics he had in class were just like, it was so clear looking at these, you know, because it it's about, you know, the racism towards Japanese. And here's a picture of Hitler and Mussolini, and they're about this tall. Here's the Japanese guy that's half their size.
Uh-huh. And it really makes a strong point as to what he was trying to say. And I thought that having, like, a separate meet you know, not just text, but adding a picture would have really helped prove his point. Going out with Meg's one that really made a difference with Meg Jacobs one Uh-huh. That she had these pictures where it's like so like, I it was meant more like before, like, when she'd say old while they're, you know, trying to do this propaganda, I was sort of detached to it about how how over the top propaganda was.
And then you see these pictures, and they're just so like, nowadays, they think of this parodied almost because they're just so comic. Mhmm. And I think it just really helped push the point to sort of the how strong these things were going. To answer Professor Abel's question, think you make a lot of points as to the relationship between the servants, or I don't know what the proper word for them is, villiers, is that his name? Mhmm.
So if there was some sort of document that could have, like a diary or something that would kinda because you suggest that maybe, you know, he had a favorite servant and that there are all these possibly, you know, interactions between the servants. If there was some kind of diary from one of the people in the house that actually says what the home life was actually like. I mean, it's unfortunate that one doesn't exist, so that could help explain if there was just some pent up animosity between a couple of the servants or if it was something broader. Because I I believe that it was something broader, but it could have just been, you know, a personal feud. Mhmm.
And I think you I think if something like like that existed it would have. Yeah, I think there probably isn't anything like that, but the reason why I haven't published this is that I'm still not very happy with how much I know about the master of the house. I know there are places where I can go poke around in Paris to find that out. I think by learning more about him, about the sources of his wealth, some other things I might be able to have access to, I then might be able to draw a little bit broader and richer picture of that household. And so, yeah, I think that's, to my mind, that's the one, uh, documentary weakness right now in this piece that I I wanna fill in before I, uh, try to get it published somewhere.
What what did you wanna say, mama? I was just, because he said that the graphics that Dower used, that's what actually really I liked about Meg's piece is that that's really the way she lectures, she has these great graphics that completely support and add to her points. Let's talk about images then, Okay? Because Nick's first claim is that once the images are up, right, it's all clear. It's there.
Right? It's compelling. And, mean, I'll over read into what you said, right, to make the point, and then we can back away from it a little bit. But, the image, and our understanding of the image is something that speaks for itself. Right?
Or that has that potential to be so powerful that it speaks, you know, for itself. That that, you know, all I have to do is see that Hitler is tall and the monkey man is short. Right? And and there it is. Right?
It's a kind of tableau for me to understand how racism in World War two is is playing itself out. Right? The One of the concerns that, say, the quantitative historian might have, right, is that, uh, is that well, I mean, thinking about the early modern period, we have a large collection of preserved artworks. Right? And one of the tropes, I mean, just to go back to the widow piece for a moment, one of the tropes that's out there that's both literary and artistic, right, is the me remarrying widow.
Right? Who, you know, is cavorting and gallivanting about with younger men, and it's all very inappropriate and so forth. Right? And then the question is, if that image, in fact, this article originally had an image when it was or had two or three actually, when it was in paper form and being presented, and then of course, when it went off to the stuffy journal, all of that got you know, some journals will take pictures and some won't. Um, and the Journal of Family History has no use for pictures.
Um, this is a very sort of quantitative gang. And part of what I was doing with the pictures was actually using things that the quantitative evidence suggests are wrong. And I was sort of doing that deliberately. But we could we could be suspicious that professor Dauer has for your, you know, beguilement in Monday's lecture. Right?
Put up the pictures that that are maybe not representative. The problem is we don't know. Right? And they're very powerful. That's what sticks with us.
Especially our culture. We're much more visual than perhaps earlier cultures. Yeah. Go ahead, Peter. Kinda similar to what Rifo does as well?
Because she puts up these imposing pictures of cattle, and then she says, well, I'm gonna tell you why it's probably not true. Or at least the story behind them isn't true. So I guess images can't always be taken at the face value like that. Well, I mean, that's certainly her claim. Right?
That the images have been manufactured deliberately in a way, right, to be misleading. Now, not to be misleading to us. The point about them was to be misleading to their contemporaries. Right? To create an image Well, of Well, but we could say that about, you know, these sort of racially charged images that come out of World War two propaganda as well.
That they were They they they were misleading even at the time. Maybe not deliberately, maybe not self consciously, but if Dower's point that the racism is so embedded, right, that people can't even see it, if that's true, then the images are They are both proving the point and making the point dangerous simultaneously. Right. Yeah. Go ahead, Ben.
Uh, I was just gonna say, I don't really see how that's too much different than, uh, just like other sources, like the actual images from the time. Mhmm. Because, I mean, like, with the cattle, there were sources saying, you know, these are ancient and, you know, magnificent and all that other stuff. But, like, you you know, the a picture speaks to us, you know, that's that's sort of, like, our perspective on it. But I don't think you can categorize them as being more dangerous when looking at them as sort of references than any written work.
Go ahead, Annie, and then Maria. Yeah. It's a whole thing. It's just interpreting, right? If you have the pictures of these married widows jumping, that says something about those times, right, that people somehow wanted to think about that, and that's, a different question almost than the one you answered.
Mhmm. Right? Mhmm. Like a different you're talking like social history there. Like, why why was this an important image?
Why did you know, whatever. So I think it also depends on, like, what you're looking at it, and it's the same way with, like, political cartoons from World War two tell us something different. It tells us something about the way people were thinking. It's more like social history, and and read the cattle piece, but apparently the same thing. These people wanted to believe it for a reason.
Like, it was important, and there was a reason behind that. And so it's, like, understanding two different things. Right? One is, like, the facts of, like, what was actually true. Right?
The married widows were not so married. Uh-huh. And the other thing is, like, social history. Like, people wanted to think that they were married widows for some reason or another. Mhmm.
So I don't know, think it depends on I mean, that's one thing that historian can do. Right? Is say, Alright, I've got this range of evidence, it comes in different sort of methodological formats. And some of it seems to contradict each other. So, I quantitative records that suggest that widows are economically disadvantaged.
I have an iconographic tradition and a literary tradition that suggests that widows are sort of running around having a great old time because they're widows. Right? And they've gotten rid of that bothersome first husband. They've inherited They've his cash. They've got his cash.
Right? They've inherited the fortune, and now they can run around with younger men. Right? And I could take both of those pieces of evidence, and I could say, wow, this is really interesting. First of all, in some sense that there was a truth in the past, they can't both be true, or at least they can't both be true for the same people simultaneously.
Right? So, it's possible that there's just two groups. There There are are poor widows, and then there are romping around rich widows. And just narrow the two shall meet. Right?
I mean, that's one possibility. Another is what you've just suggested, Annie, and that is, well, maybe society is afraid of the one, even though it's not so common, and ignores the other because it's so common and it's not representationally frightening. And so, the one is gonna show up in cultural sources, and the other is gonna only show up through this kind of, you know, careful digging in fiscal records that were gathered for some completely different purpose. Right? And I mean, in a way, that's what That's how I've tried to think about the problem.
But it's nonetheless a cautionary. Right? Because visual images have such an impact on us. I mean, maybe what would be really great, if you couldn't get the diary, maybe you should make up some drawings of the events, and that would be good too. Right?
Because then you could have a great picture, or two or three. Well, in fact, are several great pictures of precisely this object. They're not French sources, but there's a great there are a couple of great British sources. One, of conniving Italian opera director who outfits his main diva with a false rump that exaggerates its curvaceousness. He's fitting her with it.
And then there's another one, a political cartoon of Walpole from the early seventeen forty's of everyone having to he strides over the entry to government and everybody has to climb up the ladder and kiss his bare rump that's exposed before they can go on in and get an office in the British government. Mean, know, So Christel, my wife has suggested that to her it seems like the eighteenth century might better be labeled the century of the rump. These reasons. You go to Miranda. I think that the problem is also with pictures you have to be very, careful with numbers, because we're so used to thinking numbers, thinking pictures are much, much more powerful, but in fact, I think a lot of society is completely controlled by numbers.
Can say, and there's a real problem because people are like, well, know, the scientists said this, so it's true. Mhmm. And you can get, you know, well, you know, 30% of these you know, the problem of saying that they had the social the social scientists of World War two saying, you know, by our science, we've proven that, you know, that they are less smart than us. And something like that. And it's sort of, you know, if you put out a number, like 33% of people are in it are this Mhmm.
People will almost automatically accept that. And a lot more times as, you know, it'll be a stronger thing than it's saying, well, a bunch of people are like this. And so I think you have to be and a lot of science things are are really you know, lot of these numbers are not they're not fuzzy, but they're like it's a there's a very, very small margins to go. There's not a, you know, alright. This is a 100, and this is one.
And so it's it's can be really you have to be as as careful, I think, with numbers as are with pictures of Mhmm. Being very careful of what is the, um, what is the percentage that says, this is a true fact, this is not a And then you address it and you think you're saying that you did address that problem in your thing of Mhmm. About the pawnshop where this percent happens during the winter months and random thing would only suggest this Right. Okay. Mean, that's one way of doing it.
Yeah. Right? It's saying, what what would we expect, and how far do we deviate from what we expect? As opposed to just giving a number. Gosh.
30% of all the pawns happened in the wintertime. Right? And then, oh, yeah. But, like, 30% of the months are in the wintertime or something like that. Right?
I mean, 25%. There we go. That'd be a better number. But, I mean, that's I mean, that's an excellent observation, and you guys presumably are, you know, numerically literate enough, or numerate enough. Should I say that?
Can I say that? Numerate? You guys are numerate enough that you think of those things, but lots of people actually don't. But Ian, are you responding to this? Oh, pretty much.
Just saying that this seems like it is or a lot of these seem like they're addressed to a very academic audience of perhaps quantitative historians and something that we can access pretty readily, you know, being And I I just don't I don't think that what was there was a big point to this. That's kind of a story. I don't think that the the danger I think that we're more likely and quantitative historians and us, people who are able to really understand what's going on, are also correspondingly much less likely to take it at face value. They're much less likely to To read critically. To because, I mean, people at large are very trustful at statistics.
Yeah. But people who understand statistics who can know what's going on are aren't at all. Right. No. That's true.
That's true. And it kinda mitigates the risk of Yeah. The Yeah. Go ahead. To connect that, going back to Holy Feast Holy Fast, think there's I know we all the book that won't go away.
I mean, even though I mean, that's not a not published in historical journal. That's actually published put out onto onto the wider market. Right? And she uses she uses statistics that are very fuzzy. Right?
But I remember her saying, and 63% of a sample the size of nine. You know? And That's right. And I think that's the See, that was your objection. Wasn't it, Miranda?
At one point, yeah. The fact that this is in a in a book that has a national circulation, therefore, I would think I mean, more people I mean, I don't think there's gonna be people going into a bookstore and picking up poetry for the books, randomly to read it for their entertainment. But still, it it has a it has a broader circulation than, say, an article like this. Mhmm. And so I think it is it's more worrisome that you have these fuzzy statistics in a book like that than, say, if you had them in an article like this where the readers are going to be more discerning.
Is that Yeah. I mean, it's not entirely clear to me that these journals are more or less obscure than than the readership for something like Holy Feast, Holy Fast. But no, I mean, you're absolutely right. There are plenty of places where historians wanna make a point or any kind of, know, rhetoricians, journalists, scholars of any kind wanna make a point. And, you know, they know that if they were really pushed on it, they wouldn't put too much stock in their percentage.
But by golly, it's good to report it because it sounds powerful. You know? So, I mean, of course, that's everywhere. Yeah. Peter?
Historical journals, anything like like the scientific journals, like, they refereed and things like that? Because then you kinda get because I know whenever I'm looking for stuff for scientific classes like textbooks, you know, you can pretty much in any textbook, you can find blatantly wrong information. Mhmm. Because they're not refereed. I guess I guess you kinda trust what you read in a journal more because if it's refereed, somebody's read it and Mhmm.
Presumably some authority in the field has read it and said, well, this seems good enough for me. So, to me, it would be good enough for my purposes that if there are numbers, then I'm going to trust the trends that they predict. Mean, that's I've gotten through there. That's an excellent question. Everything you read today has been refereed except for professor Rabble's piece, which has been completely fabricated.
And that's that's why he's unwilling to publish it. He didn't want me to tell you that. But I mean, but that's a really good question. The the mean, the typical the typical journal process that I'm familiar with is at least one and preferably two referees. With a book, it's typically two to three or even four.
Is it sometimes four? It might be publisher is not very sure Sure. What's going on. Right. Right.
And and and so, I mean, the process is supposed to be anonymous. I do a fair amount of refereeing for the journal of economic history. Um, and I know the field of economic historians reasonably well, so I get anonymous articles and I know exactly who it is. Right? Um, but the but the process is in theory anonymous.
And I think, I mean, obviously, it must be often in practice and especially in fields that are really big, know, like French cultural history. Presumably, it is more anonymous because because, you know, there are many many more practitioners out there. So the random element increases. Uh, and and the idea is indeed that a specialist has been found who you know, in in in my case, usually, I'm being called on to evaluate somebody's quantitative techniques to make sure that, uh, that there's not some, you know, sort of egregious either deliberate, um, you know, misapplication of something or or just an egregious oversight that that would sort of bring the, um, the conclusions of the article into question. Yeah.
But, you know, I think also in I'm sure in your field as well as in other fields that part of what the referee's task is, is not just to make sure that the methodology has been properly followed or to assure the absolute truth factor at the conclusion of the article, But in some cases, just simply to provide a useful, stimulating, provocative new argument that the journal, the author, and the editors then hope will generate more discussion and more controversy. I think that in some sense it's not so much the truth value as I'm just thinking of I'm going to start to figure a stand as an editor of a journal called Studies in eighteenth Century Culture. And we get a lot of submissions that are hashing over old territory and I'm not interested in putting that stuff in there. I want some new ideas even if I have some questions about whether they're right or not because I think it's gonna stimulate further discussion and contributions to the field. I mean, that's the other thing that the reviewer should be doing is asking the so what question for sure.
Yeah. Anne Marie. But what happens if the referee completely disagrees with an interpretation? Does There's a procedure called revise and resubmit. And at some point, the editor has to make the call as to whether the reviewer is right or the author of the article is better off, has a stronger argument.
The the typical thing that happens, I I think I speak probably for all of us in the department, is, you know, you send an article off, you're pretty pleased with it by the time you finally get around to sending it off, and you're certainly relieved, right, to have gotten rid of it. And then, and months go by because it takes forever for the reviewer to get their review back to the journal. Um, and we're all guilty of this on the other side too, right? So, we literally send these things off and forget about them. Because they're gonna be gone for a long time and then finally they come back and you re you know, often, I don't know, maybe this doesn't happen to you, but I read the reviewers comments and I think, a complete idiot.
Yeah. How dare so and so, whoever so and so is, right? And it's anonymous. How dare they say these ridiculously stupid things about my article? And and and then, you know, then then the processes I think often one of coming back from that.
Of saying, well, maybe there's some merit to it. And I mean, and sometimes sometimes there really isn't. Right? They've, you know, they've they've asked you to use data that don't exist, for instance. I mean, that happens to me a lot.
Well, it'd be really great if the author did x, and I always think, I would agree. Should I make it up? Right? You know, it would be wonderful. Um, so, I mean, it's a dial that process is a dialogue.
And and I don't know. Does this happen to you? Do you get mad when reviewers' comments come back? They all sound brilliant. Oh.
No. Same thing happens. Absolutely. Anyway, yes. So for the lesser mortals amongst us.
But but the but the process I mean, ideally, Peter, the process should be an iterative one in in which, at least two parties and possibly more are pushing against each other. I mean, another common problem is that two reviewers reports come back and they disagree with each other. Right? And then you think, okay, great. What am I supposed to do?
I really just wanna get this thing published and and, you know, and and off my desk, um, and and and out of my mind and so forth. But that's pretty instructive too. I mean, I remember with my first book, you know, people read it and off you comments, not just the readers. The press gets to read it, but you have friends and colleagues whose opinions you respect and ask them to read it. And the upshot of getting maybe a dozen or so of these comments back was that at some point, everybody contradicted everybody.
And I had do or delete everything from the book. And at some level, at some point, that liberates you to say, I can't satisfy everybody, but these comments guide me towards what is the central argument and the main merit of the book. And that's what you pull out in your final revisions, and that's what you try to stress. So let me ask you a very different kind of question. All of these things you read are by people who are currently teaching in the department here.
And presumably, many of you have had many of them. Yes? Not yet? Now you're dying to go have more courses with some of them, right? Or maybe not, I don't know.
Part of my sort of higher agenda in asking you to read these things was simply to get you thinking about, what are the local resources? What do they look like? Who are these people that teach at the institution that I happen to be at? And my guess is that, overall, you read fairly little by by your professors. Because we're all kind of shy and reluctant to make you read our stuff, I think, or mostly.
In fact in fact, when I told and when I told, um, Harriet Rittvo that I was doing this, she said, oh, you can't assign your own piece. That you can't do. So it was okay to assign all my colleagues, but I wasn't allowed to assign. And I said forget it. If I'm gonna do this, I'm gonna give them something of mine too.
Um, but I think there's a reluctance to do that. So so part of it was just, you know, for your edification. But but also, I mean, I because I printed yours out, I couldn't resist reading the first sentence. And and it was great. Um, can can I share this with you guys?
Do you mind if I Okay. This is, I don't claim to be a full blown historian. Not yet at least. So there's a chance that I missed some grand chain that connect the works of some of the history faculty together. Because if there was one, I missed it.
Okay. I just thought this was really great. I mean, what what does anything hold all of this together? Okay. We all happen by virtue of a whole bunch of accidents to be employed here.
It's like it's like asking what holds the physics department together because there you have nuclear physics, quantum physic you know, you have all these different things. And and these are also highly specialized, so I don't I don't really see what what the problem is. Well, except that physics does manage at least to teach eight zero one and eight zero two and sort of believe that there's some coherent curriculum. Yes. I mean, I hope there's a coherent curriculum to eight zero one and eight zero two.
Otherwise, an awful lot of people have suffered in vain. I've seen it in some other schools where they'll have for the history department is like, you know, like, or most definitely when you get in, high schools and stuff from the beginning is basic world history, which, you know, tries to start from Neanderthals and go on. Mhmm. And, you know, and then, like, a little bit more specialized, get American history and European history, and, like, they go basically by region so that you can get a sort of general sense of the region and such. I mean, there's always the problem of, I think, of, you know, what mattering by what school and where you go to.
You can get very specific ones or you can get people who are like, yeah. We're doing, you know, we're doing basic world history, and they'll jump from, you know, Neanderthals, Rome, a little bit of Middle Ages, Renaissance, and then, you know To the nineteenth century. American history, and it's sort of and then, you know, maybe a little bit of World War one too and Vietnam. That's it. Plato to NATO.
That's to That's great. Plato to NATO. Go ahead, Peter. I think reading some of these helps explain some of the subject offerings in the department. Yeah.
I was like, I I hope so. Because it's interesting because I've had Paulie Meyer a bunch of times. Uh-huh. And like I took her like basic classes first and then like all of a sudden I took her American Revolution class and we just threw everything she ever wrote at us So pretty this is why you're teaching this class because feel like you know best. And I know Professor Ravel teaches French some kind of French class or Some kind of French class.
We serve we serve cheese and wine. What's interesting is, like, I know he also teaches Latin American history. So it's kinda interesting to see because, like, when you look through the curriculum and you see all these names and up until this time, I really haven't put many faces to it because I've only had a couple of professors. Mhmm. But it helps explain, like, I didn't realize, like and you with all your numbers.
Believe it or not, I don't like numbers even though I go here. And your paper kinda scared me, but it's I don't think I understand. Like, you don't really recognize. Yeah. The expression jumped out also.
Yeah. Was like, I don't know what this means. I'll take your word for it. Especially because you're an MIT faculty, so I think you're more likely to believe a quantitative historian at MIT than a quantitative historian at, you know, Yale or Princeton or something. Some of us aren't likely to believe them anyway.
Lots of us aren't likely to okay. I mean, clearly, the subject offerings that get into a catalog, right, at any given place are going to be driven by two pressures. One is some sense that will be either greater or lesser at different institutions depending on how they're funded, right, and how they're run. But some sense that there's a curriculum that has to be covered. So that's the Plato to NATO piece, I guess.
Right? And at the same time, and maybe in conflict with that, there's going to be all the idiosyncrasies, idiosyncrasies how do I say that of the individuals who teach there, and what they want to do. And so, what Harriet really wants to do is to teach a class about animals in the nineteenth century. Right? She's dying to do that.
She's been talking to me for years about, you know, this sort of hypothetical animal class that she really wants to teach. And, you know, it's you can imagine, you know, to sort of pick on a stereotype, but sort of a big state school, you know, a provost or a dean saying, what? A class on animals in the nineteenth century? You've gotta be kidding me. You know, we've got stuff we have to cover.
Right? We have to teach Western Civ. We have to teach global history. You know, we have we we have to teach Asia after all. It's a big place, and, you know, even though we never used to do it, we really ought to, or something like this.
Right? And so, you know, maybe the animals in the nineteenth century course never goes, because these commitments are so overwhelming. But at MIT, right, the animal course is eventually gonna happen. Know, you will Because of the British royal family, which is a tiny, tiny, like, I mean, in terms of, you know, of overall scheme, it's a really tiny course in terms of material. Exactly.
Exactly. And and and those kinds of courses reflect very much the things that we're interested in doing, and that have grabbed us in their arcane particularities. I wonder if you could come back to Anne Marie's question, which or a comment, which was, well, it didn't really bother her that there seemed to be no core or senator. Was that the response that the rest of you had? Or maybe some of you discerned the commonality in all of these readings?
I think it's a good thing. I mean, like, I kind of think about other departments. Mean, it's not like, having no course shows shows me that the professors are here in history, like, you know, following their passions, what they wanna do. And, like, I think that's same as an engineering professor. Know?
I mean, I I've Mhmm. My adviser does fluid. She doesn't do mechanics. You know? Mhmm.
And having talked to people about history and gone through the PLATO to NATO history in high school Mhmm. Like, I think that you lose a lot of people and they miss the point of history. It's not, you know, it's not, oh, you know, this happened then, this happened then, and then this happened. It's not dates. It's more about, you know, like, why did this happen?
You know? What were these people really thinking? And I think that this is a more effective way to cover it by having really specialized areas. You may not cover it. Well, may not cover you know, you may not cover everything, but, I mean, knowing that, you know, the Romans invaded or attacked Carthage in, you know, 100 BC doesn't make you a better historian.
Does it? You know? But possibly, it makes you a better person. Go go ahead, Miranda. I I half agree and half, like, I I really like that.
I mean, this sort of yeah. What interests a lot of people in history and things this other scene is the very specific facts. Like, you know, like, I really loved the I'm taking I took polyamorous American Revolution just because it's so small of a subject and so interesting, you know, getting through one tiny subject and really delving in. And yet I feel like a lot of times I've lost a bunch of things. Like, I would really love to learn to have I mean, not the basic Plato de Nato, but maybe sort of by region of, you know, a basic thing of of English history and, you know, of Wales and Ireland and Scotland and all that sort of or, like, a basic thing of, you know, overall of one, you know, one country sort of emergence and such.
And I feel like you sort of we want this this there's a step between the Plato to NATO classes and the very specific classes that I feel like is usually missing is the sort of a medium sized version. See, for me, in high school, I ended up doing the very specific thing of America in the sixties. So I kind skipped the Plato to NATO thing. I never did it. But what I That's unusual, isn't it, in a high school curriculum?
Oh, yeah. It's because I ended up taking it at Duke instead of at my high Oh, I see. Okay. Okay. I I just completely skipped the history thing in high school.
Mhmm. Wise. Well, that except for Hawaiian. I didn't know the specific Hawaii history thing. But anyway but when I came here, I actually did they had middle courses for regions, because I took mostly Middle Eastern courses.
They do really do a really nice in-depth job of doing overall view of history in The Middle East and a little bit of the outside stuff. But what I found was since I since I stayed so much in The Middle East, I'm taking a poly sci class, and the connections to the outside world are kind of what lost. Right? The things that like, I know these things happen, and I know what happened in this area, but what was happening in Europe Mhmm. Completely clear.
Yeah. Well, I mean, one of the problems and presumably this is a problem in physics too, since, right, that's a discipline that's been brought up. Ideally, we would all know lots about everything, and then really a lot about a few things. Right? In fact, what turns out is that we know a little about not quite everything.
And then a lot about the specific places where we're doing research or where we've done a lot of teaching, and so our reading has been very in-depth or something like that. Right? So, the problem is an information management one. And presumably, that's a problem in physics too. It's just that it might be because of the way curriculums have been established, and maybe especially at MIT, that knowing a lot about everything, that piece happens at least momentarily, you know, in that kind of first year sequence so that people can say, ah, yes.
You know, I've had physics. I know what it is. I at least know what it is that I'm supposed to know, even if I can't remember how to do it. Right? Something like that.
Whereas, it's not clear what you would take in history that would give you that feeling at the end of the freshman year, let's say, that you could go out into the public and say, ah, yes. Right? I've had that. I know what it is I'm supposed to know even if I don't remember all the details. Yeah, Peter.
I was mentioning that whole overview of knowing everything just reminds me of Broad L for some reason. Well Like if there was a Broad L for every part of the world, I think that would be kind of similar because Mhmm. He just, I mean, he took this pretty big read. I mean, this is a pretty big read and a pretty big thing and laid it all out for you and Mhmm. Nice take home size book and Well, should be just be reading for the rest of our mind.
But I mean, just I just thought of that. I guess it's possible, but we all seem to think that Bradell was a little nuts, so I guess it's not. Well, I mean, came up last week as well. Nick, I think it was you who said that when you were reading the discarded image that there was this whole world, right, of literary references that were just at the tip of Lewis's tongue, right, that let yeah. Right.
That that left you, the reader, thinking, well, this would all be great and compelling if I knew what the hell he was talking about. Right? But but I but I don't because I haven't because I haven't read all of this. And and possibly, if I'd read all of that stuff, I couldn't have read all about, you know, the use of the camel and the drumdery, um, on different parts of the Mediterranean Coast. Right?
Because it's not possible, um, unless we go with Anne Marie's suggestion, which is that we do nothing but read for the rest of our lives. Right? Which is not a bad suggestion. Right? You know, and and in fact, I think is perhaps I mean, that that may in fact be the distinguishing curse of the professional historian.
Does that sound fair to you? Well, Jeff spends a lot of time watching baseball games. But aside from that, you know, that there's this sense of always needing to read more. Right? This paper can't be published, for instance.
Why? Because I have to go do some more archival thing. Right. Right. And that there's that there's more to the story that hasn't been uncovered yet or there are connections from this story to other stories and so on and so forth.
So imagine if you will that this history department had geographic and chronological coverage. Right? You've got some smattering of geographical and chronological coverage here. Not great though, really. Right?
I mean, if we think about sort of all the times and all the places that aren't represented here. And that it's not I mean, it's the case that I don't have all my colleagues. But even if I had given you something from every single one of my colleagues, we would still be missing lots of times and places. But let's assume for the moment we've got the we've hit the big ones. Right?
But we were all working in sort of the same methodological frame. So I don't know. We were all doing political history of, um, you know, maybe maybe of the Meg Jacobs variety. Um, and that is that we had we knew something about the, in this case, governmental institutions that were relevant for that particular time and place, and we could explicate them, and hopefully we would have good pictures to go with them as well. Right?
The thing I like about this article is it's a couple of really great pictures, right, in search of a narrative. And then and then Meg supplies a really great narrative. Um, but but one can completely imagine in this case that you start with the pictures and and then figure out how to build a narrative around that. Yeah. Now, I was just gonna ask, I mean, you know, is the selection of what gets taught here and who gets chosen to teach it completely random?
Or to your minds, are there certain times and places and topics that must be taught at MIT in 02/2004. Go ahead, Ben. Think MIT is really good about having region. Like, they at least have one person that covers a different region. So I mean, there's always there's a Middle Eastern there's someone who teaches the Middle East, the Far East, Europe, America.
And so the overall view I'm thinking of South America. Well, that's Jeff in his spare time. Yeah. Okay. So we're not watching baseball games.
Yeah. And Africa is problematic. Yeah. Or Australia too. Yeah.
Go ahead, Ben. I just wanted to say that I actually think the American history is covered pretty well. Like, you have Pauline Mears to to, like, whenever to civil war Right. And then civil war on. And then she also teaches American Revolution, and professor Mary Rose Smith teaches the civil war, and then professor Jacob teaches World War two and the Asher words.
And I don't know. Like, with with regards to American history, I actually big wars covered. Yeah. I got all the big wars covered. Yeah.
I got the impression centuries. I mean Yeah. Well Not all that challenging very true, but I I I also think that American history is pretty important, especially in America? America. Yeah.
And so I I was just in think we got that covered decently well. Which I always find amusing is that there's at MIT, there's a law and society class. And then the history department has law and society in American history. Where's the law and society class taught? There's there's anthropology.
And anthropology. And they choose completely different classes. Yeah. Sylvia, I guess, who teaches that. Oh, that's right.
That's right. Okay. So, but those are both fairly new in the curriculum. Both both those are both mean New professors too. New to MIT.
Right. Right. Well, I mean, this is another huge issue. Right? And that is and that is people who are at the margins of disciplines.
And history tends to be a a discipline that picks up and also drops off, right, lots of people at the margins. Right? So, they're, you know, mean, in my case, right, it's economics and history. In Elizabeth Wood's case, it's political science and history. In Harriet's case, it's literature and history.
Um, in, um, Bob Fogleason's case, you know, it would be basically sociology, I guess, and history. Right? And so we can you know, it's a it's a discipline that tends to collect people like this who either belong here, but also belong elsewhere or belong elsewhere, but can put a foot in here. Um, and there are I think there are fewer disciplines. Other disciplines that that are as malleable that way.
Right? Because well, and well, in all of history of science. Yeah. It is starting to spread. Like bioengineering, which is kind of different in materials and science and And the biochemists, aren't there now like biophysicists?
Biophysicists, everything across your biology and computer science classes, modeling and computer classes. But is biology the glue that's holding it together? Depends on which perspective you're having from. You're computer scientists. Well, the reason I ask that is because I think there are some interesting disciplinary parallels.
Right? Let's, for the sake of argument, say that biology then becomes another one of these nodes, where lots of stuff comes in at the edges, or biologists trickle out, right, at the edges. And if we thought about history as one of these nodes and biology as one of these nodes, what is that telling us? Mean, in some sense, these are the these are the sort of the very inclusive sciences. Right?
And biology can make this large claim to being the study of life processes. Well, gosh, what a surprise. Life processes turns out to have something to do with everything. Right? And history can make the claim that it's the study of what has gone before.
And gosh, what a surprise. Right? It turns out that the study of what has gone before has something to do with everything. So, you can have history of science, and you can have history of economics, and you can have history of art, and you can have history of bones, and you can have history of coins, and you can have even, um, you know, history of geophysicists. Right?
I mean, it it the possibilities for for thinking about about interdisciplinary projects is endless. Right? Because because everything has a past, and you could think about that past in connection with sort of the larger past. And if we if we've given the larger past to the history discipline, then then they can have their fingers all over. Just like the biologists turn out, they can have their fingers all over.
Yeah. Ian. I I think part of it has to do with the method of problem solving that different disciplines teach And that history teaches a way to look at certain problems and to come up with answers, do research, come up with answers, present them in a way that people will understand and accept. Computer science is equally about problem solving, about finding computational ways to solve everyone's problems. Or to make them.
Or to make them, you know, by the same token. And I think that's just and you know, and thing with rhetoric or with people who are, you know, if you're well, I don't know really few people are career writers, but, you know, people in Mhmm. And and and with the same field, you know, if you learn the the techniques of of writing persuasively Mhmm. Then you can apply yourself anything. It could just about what problem solving techniques are unique to a field rather than necessarily the subject matter.
Okay. So let's try that. Let's say that the history department at MIT is not held together geographically. It is not held together chronologically. That's good.
Right? We don't want it to be because if we were, then we wouldn't have coverage. Right? And coverage is a good thing. The way that Ben in the way that Ben has already articulated.
By golly, the Americanists at least have coverage. Right? The rest of the world's looking spotty. Okay. So that's so that's not what's holding us together.
Ian suggests it's the way we answer questions. It's our methodology. Now, do you are you convinced of that? You've read six things. No.
Not too convinced. I mean, you look at if I just look at two pieces, I look at Mike Jacobs' piece Mhmm. And I look at your piece. And Meg Jacobs looks at pictures and says, I'm gonna tell you why these you know, she has all these posters and you said or the narrative to it. Mhmm.
You look at your piece, you say you see all these Limbic aborting around and you're gonna tell say, why this isn't true. So Well, I love that. I mean, it's so black and white, but I think that, I mean, you take an approach, you look at numbers, or you look at trends through quantitative. But is that incidental? I mean, what Ian was suggesting, I think, is that there's something fundamental about the way both Meg and I ask and answer questions.
And the fact Meg has these great posters, which let's face it, I just don't have. Otherwise, I'd be using them too. And I have a quantitative methodology. That's surface noise. And that there is something that holds Meg and I together that's that's more fundamental or or maybe not.
Right? I mean, that's what you guys need to assess. Miranda? I think that there is a little something which is not it's just based sort of by and I think it's very specific by what by where you go. Like, MIT's history department would be very different from another place's history department.
And, like, there is some separations in, like, physics in terms of quantitative versus theoretical. Mhmm. But it's sort of what are you teaching them to do afterwards? There's sort of the push of the history stuff I feel of, you know, the point is to learn not basically to learn a specific, you know, thing or else you're gonna be like, okay, well, don't really need to do, you know, a general sense, just study American. Mhmm.
The point is to learn how to analytically look at these things and write papers and teach from this. Well, you know, if you have a physics thing or a computer science one, you can have the okay. Well, if you're practical, if, you know, then you're you're quantitative. You're like, alright. This is the way you make a program and use it to something like that versus if you're, um, theoretical, it's how do you manipulate all these equations to figure out these different pro problems.
So it's more what are you teaching them to do afterwards with this? I think that that sort of gets Afterwards it what? Meaning, what are you going to grow up and be? Or just like how we use the information we get from this class. Not really not maybe not into yes.
You're all going to be historians and go into your little various areas and study deeply. But more just God forbid you've all become historians. The market is terrible. Let me tell you. Like, it's not like you're taking one you know, if you're trying to study and like, for history, if you're trying to specifically teach history as in teach the facts of one of one area or one time period or something like that, this is not the way to teach it because you're saying, okay, well, you know, in fact, we want you to take things from different time periods and take different things like that.
Well, I could see other places going, well, the point is to teach you about this one stop spot or one time or one, idea and really focusing on that. There's bit of potential for that. If you really didn't want to study American history here, you could do a history major here, but basically only take American history. No, you have you have to to take take at least Okay. Well, I'm from different places.
Have no idea what I'm talking about. But You have to take it out of your Yeah. My other history major. You have to take American, European, and some other area. Yeah.
Regardless of my idiocy. I I don't wanna I think that I mean, you still have, like, historical and, like, posing and and researching and answering questions in a historical context still has more in common than I mean, mean, and this isn't, again, something that's necessarily to to the MIT history department, but something that's I'm What saying is is it, Ian? What you you believe there's something that makes Jeff, Meg, Harriet, myself, John Dauer, there's something that makes us historians. Now, superficially, all have PhDs in history. Right?
And that helps. Right? I mean, maybe, you know, maybe that's it. We've all gone through a credentialing process, and so we're living in this sort of elaborate fiction that we have something in common just because we tell ourselves we do, but we don't. But I mean, you seem to really believe that there's something that we share in common despite our ostensible differences.
And we should try to tease that out. Go ahead, Mona. I actually have a comment that Professor Van Everest in the Polysci department And it made me realize that there isn't really in common to MIT history professors. It's that they are very different from history professors anywhere else. According to Steve Benevera.
Okay. Benevera. Because he went on this entire diatribe about how historians on the first day of class, how historians are are not very useful for political scientists because they just do these specific events, and they're not and they're supposed to be individual and unique in history. Therefore, historians don't want follow these big patterns and these kinds of stuff. And I found that really unusual because all the history classes I've had here do believe in, like, making you think about, you know, if people act like this, why is it?
And how does this affect later on? Okay. Should we tell her about why political scientists are not very useful for historical I already got that. That's presented in my colleague. I have to take a I have to take a Hassid that wasn't in the history department.
Okay. Okay. So we let's let's let's parse that claim out, although it would be great to have Steve here so that we could be fair to him too, right? But what I'm hearing you report him saying. Oh no, but then when I talked to him afterwards about MIT, he's like, yeah, people at MIT do do it differently.
I was talking about more in general. Because I was Okay. Looking at like a nice lady. Okay. So his so but his his take on historians writ large with a capital h.
Right? Not necessarily his callings here, but the rest of them. Um, his take on that is that historians are driven by narrative. Yeah. That they tell stories.
And after all, story is in our disciplinary name. Right? I mean, is. Just like life is in the biology name. And so their big claim to being part of everything is that after all, they're about life.
And our big claim to being part of everything is that we tell stories. Right? And we've we've incorporated it into our identification of ourselves in the in the very language that we use to describe ourselves. The count the corollary to that is that we don't do analysis. Right?
I mean, that's I think what I'm hearing you say. The social scientist, according to professor Van Everest, who's not here to defend himself. The social scientist does looks looks across large phenomenon and analyzes them. The historian tells narrative details. Yeah.
That was his complaint. Mhmm. And but when I went up to ask him because I took a class at MassLege, she actually was very good about doing Mhmm. Like, an analysis and that kind of stuff. So I've actually found that at least the majority of professors I've had in MIT are very good at the overall analysis type of thing.
Mhmm. So that might be why you you all end up being here at MIT. Why is that a good thing versus a bad thing? That's the problem I have. Is that the first thing is well, if it's narrative, then it's not as good as if it's quantitative.
And in fact, I really love to make Jacob's piece because I could just get the whole story from the beginning to the end. Mhmm. Well, like, I like I I had problems with the answer. Was just like, I'm confused of where I am. I'm absolutely lost.
Like, because I just didn't really get the culture from around it, and then see that within Now see, what's great about that is just scared me. Is that when when when I read Meg's piece, right, you know, what am I writing in the margins I'm writing? What's the question here? What's the question? Why do I care about this story?
Right? I mean, not in a not in a mean snide way, the way I just said it. Right? But but that's but that's my reaction to to the narrative. And if we go back and we think about Braudel again, right, Braudel is in this sort of, well, category unto himself, in which there is no narrative, clearly.
Right? We're not gonna do that. But also, the analysis is kind of not the normal one either because it's not like we can pick up the Mediterranean, the age of Philip the second and say, what's the question here? Right? We could write that in the margin too.
I mean, there are a million small questions, of course. Maybe four or 5,000,000 small questions. But it's not immediately clear what the big question is. Right? Whereas in in my piece, hopefully, the big question is really obvious.
I mean, it's small, but you know, and and and that is, you know, how do we interpret the propensity or non propensity to remarry. In Peter's piece, right, the analytical mode, the two of you who read it in the past. Did you read it in Peter's class? Mhmm. So Peter so Peter Yeah.
And Matt has left us a lot of his his books too. Oh, well, you see then, just some of us are too shy, obviously. But I'm just not counting on that royalty revenue stream from That's it. That's there is no royalty. But Peter but Peter's piece would fall into sort of very I mean, it's very clear right from the beginning.
What's the question he's asking? Right? He's writing absolutely in the analytical mode. Okay. But Anne Marie, you've had your hand up forever, and I keep ignoring you.
Sorry. I was just actually gonna ask the two of you because we've kind of been having this discussion. Think in what it boils down to me is almost sort of like, why do history? Right? Like, are we are we just doing history for the story's sake?
I don't I don't think that's why you do history. Right? I don't think you go into the archives just because you're going to find some neat little facts that are going to be amusing. I mean, if we did, then we would be antiquarians. And that we could say with complete condescension.
Right? Oh, antiquarians. Right? People who just love old stuff because it's old. So isn't there some sort of I think there is a general trend in history to try yeah.
Guess going back to Van Everest, I disagree with the statement that historians don't locate things in in a general trend. Mean, I think that that to me is the whole point of history. Why'd you become a historian? Well, I have two responses to make this and to this general trend of conversation. One is, one way I think that we might talk about commonality that wasn't touched upon is that for historians, the one necessary component of what we do is an archive.
And each of us, and each of us in all of these articles, configures our archives in different ways. It isn't necessarily a brick and mortar building with pieces of paper that are yellowing and make you sneeze inside. So one way one might approach this question is what is an archive and how does each destroy and configure it? But as to the question of what good is history anyway besides being one damn thing or another after another, I think in both teaching and in the research and writing I do, history is interesting and important and goes beyond the anecdotal and amusing or the antiquarian because it offers a unique perspective on the present, on the moment that one lives in. And I think the great merit of history, the great excitement of history is that contact with the past when you perceive both how similar it is and how ununique and unoriginal we are today in comparison to all that has gone before, and yet at the same time when you also perceive that people thought it did things in a very different way that we could have never conceived of in a million years.
And so to take stock of who we are today by that constant querying of the past is the most important task of the historian in my mind. I think that's what Ian was kind of trying to get to in this underlying methodology. I think that's kind of what you just Is it, Ian? Is that what you were trying to say? Exactly.
The words are inside me. Think that's fairly, you know, that that was at the end of where I was going. I'm not sure. I think I was kind of looking for a more something more in terms of a framework of research, like, more specific. But I mean, again, I can't.
I think I'm just, I mean, I'm clearly not interested enough for the history department to be making broad claims like this, but Well, it's okay, Professor Van Evere does, so It works. He's a profession in a as a whole, that's right. No. We're gonna give him a hard time the next time we see him though. That's why I liked Dours a lot was because it really gave me that I was like like all the reading of, you know, all this the ideas that, you know, that Americans the mysticism and stuff like that.
And I've been really thinking about that particular because a lot of friends of mine are, you know, sort of getting into what I I feel like is this the cult of, you know, martial arts of basically, oh my god, everyone, you know, sort of ignoring. Well, we also fought too. You know, we have nice broadswords and fighting, but, you know, there's this sort of this special thing of people always wearing, like, you know, yin yang signs and look seeing Zen is more So how how does that how does that fit into Dower's interpretive apparatus for racism? Okay. Past and present.
I think it's sort of it's interesting that that it was the idea of the switch of the sort of both that you can have something that's a that you can look at as both a as almost, you know, that that that this is better than what we have, but also that as in well, it's so different that it's weird and wrong and something. And it's sort of the switch between, you know, during World War two of this that, you know, while they're mystic and therefore, you know, there's something wrong with them versus nowadays where it's more of the mystic and therefore the something special. And it's I think that's sort of interesting. The sort of that he was talking about the switch of that of, you know, things that you know, you say they're mystic and can be a bad thing and a good thing at the same time just mattering by where. Mhmm.
Okay. Yeah. Go ahead, Anne Marie. I think Dauer is interesting because he is the one piece we read that I think tries to most clearly locate what he did in today's world because he addresses the issue of Japanese versus American emerging industrial dominance. And Mhmm.
He really tries to locate this this question of racism all in this kind of globalized world today. And so even in his last sentences, he kind of tries to take the analysis he's done in these pages and project it onto the future. So think that's it Okay. So but let me ask you a question. Is that because his subject matter is closest in time?
Or is that because he is, let's say, the only one who is, or, you know, the one most self consciously thinking about Jeff's connection between the past and the present. Right? Do you wanna respond to that, Nick? Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. I think it's more the latter. I think he's kind of sub connecting just subconsciously connecting the two because he was talking Monday night about how, you know, one of the things that he really saw with this is that, you know, intelligence got fouled up by, you know, our opinions of the Japanese. Underestimated and misunderstood what we were going up against. And he connects that right to, like, you know, probably one the most modern things right now is this whole John Clark, Connolly's race thing.
Mhmm. And just saying how he thinks that one explanation is that the administration had this nineteen eighties eighties mindset that, you know, they were going up against nation states Mhmm. As opposed to terrorist groups that really don't have a nation, aren't you know, don't have a leader. Mhmm. And so they just misunderstood the intelligence like that.
And so I think that that doesn't really you know, the fact that World War two was only sixty years ago doesn't you know, I don't think it relates to that. And then Nick Jacobs is about the same time too. It's about World War two. I mean, because not doesn't go past that much as past World War two, but it has it has the same feeling of the this is you know, these are basic policies that are still happening nowadays with the whole problem of, you know, social security, welfare, how much the government Mhmm. Gets involved or not.
But is that because it's close in time in terms of its subject? So and, Peter, did you have your hand up in the back of my There's something else, so can Okay. I mean, I don't think so because I think it's a lot it's like, I think you can easily fit Professor Ravel's one still in there because it has, you know, it's a sort of what is the study in terms of theater in the social class. Now it has it has it's harder to fit it nowadays because there's been I think there's been, you know, the sort of the overall change or at least the wish of changing in terms of the racism, in terms of the class structure. But I think that you can still be fit in of, you know, comparisons of what happened then versus now.
Well, that starts with something on cnn.com. How much more with it can we get? That's true. Peter, I don't want to abandon wherever it was you were gonna go, but I wanna follow-up Keep going on it. One thing.
Let's let's go back to that poor holy feast holy fast for a moment. When we were talking about it, one of the things that bothered some of us, I think, I hope I'm not miss misremembering, was in particular the chapter that drew the parallels to anorexia and modern, if you will, psychological interpretations of female often, uh, behavior of fasting or starving oneself. Right? And that was problematic. Am I remembering that correctly?
That there was at least some murmuring about now, we could argue that what Bynum is doing there is despite the vast, right, almost millennia that separates her material from us. She's trying to do the same thing that John Dower did in lecture on Monday night and say, look, you know, we could actually learn something about intelligence gathering in the nineteen eighties by looking at intelligence gathering in the nineteen thirties. And, you know, it's possible that we are generous to John Dower because that, you know, it feels okay. It's not such a long time away. Whereas, Bynum's, let's face it, this is a leap.
Right? It's a huge chronological leap. Or is it the case that John Dower's done it well, irregardless of how much time either did or did not elapse, and Bynum did it sloppily. But doesn't I mean, I didn't I wasn't a part of your conversation about Vinum, but didn't you, when you were reading that book, at least think about issues of anorexia and bulimia that pawned, Western industrial and post industrial society today? I mean, wasn't there that point of contact in that book?
I don't know if that came out of the conversation or That's what I thought when I read it. Was like, you're anorexic. You know, like that's the first when I read about someone who doesn't eat for seven years, that's the first thought that pops into your mind. Right? Like, obviously, they have an eating disorder.
They're not eating. Yeah. When I read about someone who hasn't eaten for seven years, I think they should be dead. But that's the, you know, that's the materialist quantitative historian in me. From a modern perspective, that's the first thing I think.
Okay, Peter. Well, this is what I was gonna say before, actually, when I read that, I never made the connection until she did. And I don't know I'm trying to think of why I read it differently, but the first thing I thought of was really just fanaticism and not a modern day, I didn't connect it at all to modern day things because I think the fact that I read something that this person didn't eat for thirty nine years except for bread and water, was like, I I think the first thing I thought was this isn't true. And the second thing I thought was, well, it's probably something that wasn't fabricated but elaborated because of religious fanaticism. But I I don't I don't know if anyone else agree I don't know if anyone else didn't make the connection, but I never did until she brought it up.
Yeah. I also had that because I felt more that, like because, mean, what you've learned always with anorexia and stuff like that is it's more on self image of trying to, you know, trying to look pretty or something like that. That this is that's sort of sort of the culture of what it says, you know Mhmm. Is point of anorexia then it versus fanaticism and religious stuff, which is more what it sounded like this thing was at. Like, you don't hear people nowadays saying, I'm going to fast oh, and I just here's one here.
I think, me, it was the same because it's all about control, right? These women had no control of their lives. One thing they could control was their food. And with anorexics, it's the same thing. They feel they have no control, and the one thing they think they can control is their food.
And to me, that just like, I don't know, there was a big connection there in my mind. I think that the fact that you knew that about I would six today probably helped. I mean, that's not Well, I mean, that might explain Peter's total lack of that connection. Right? I mean, how much do you think about anorexia as a phenomenon today?
I mean, it may be that that's the time. Not so much in in high school, I did, but not so much anywhere. Mhmm. Well, I mean, I think it is easier for us aside from the merits of the historian and their agenda, I think that sort of all other things being equal, it's easier for us to make the connections if the gap of time is less than if the gap of time is more. Right?
Yeah. Go ahead. Great. How much I mean, Dauer's argument there to me seems very plausible because fifties to eighties, you're looking at the people who grew up in the fifties now being in charge of the eighties. I mean, it's the same generation even.
I mean Yeah. I mean, their thoughts, obviously, just just off the top of your head would be obviously influenced. I mean, a few 100 years, you would think that just time dilutes it, basically. But even even if it was, you know, World War one to the eighties, you would be like, well, that's I mean, even that difference All you had to do was talk to your grandparents. Yeah.
Right. I mean, even but even then, you would say, like, well, that's a little different than I actually grew up in, you know, was 20, and now I'm 50 and Right. In charge. Mhmm. Mhmm.
I think that makes Dauer's point a lot stronger. Okay. I mean, it is it is certainly more plausible, again, all other things being equal, that, let's say, visual discourses or narrative discourses, or even social scientific discourses about race, let's just take Dauer's example, that you grow up with will still be percolating around in the back of your head. Right? Even if you've been, you know, so called re educated by time and and changes in political circumstance, and and so on and so forth.
Right? Because we expect the individual as an autonomous being to maintain their own history. Right? In addition to all the other things that come flying at them. Whereas, nobody is around today who can say, oh, yes.
I talked to Saint Barbara. Right? Or, you know, or my grandmother knew Saint Barbara. Right? It's so far back that there's no personal connection at all.
So if Bynum is gonna make the connection that Jeff suggested we might all be in the profession because of, right, we're trying to understand ourselves. If Bynum wants to understand us, or she wants us to read her book and better understand ourselves, she's gonna have to work harder at convincing us that it's relevant than John Dauer is. Right? All other things being equal. It may also be that John Dower does a better job of it than buying them.
Right? But we're gonna have to be really careful in how we tease that out because the jobs turn out to be very different. Yeah. Peter. That's it.
I I completely forgot. When it when it comes back. Okay. Jump in right away. Okay.
Anne Marie. But by them, even in the epilogue, she does mention modern occurrences of religious fasting. Mhmm. So, I mean, it's not a phenomenon phenomenon that's disappeared from our culture, I think. So Yeah.
I would agree that it's it's still with us. And fasting for I mean, fasting for religious purposes is one of the few acceptable reasons to do extreme fasts in our world. Well, and maybe political. Right? I mean, it's the hunger strike for sale or some high moral cause.
I think the hunger strike is a high moral cause. But, I mean, those are truly the only reasons that you're allowed to, like, fast like that. Because, I mean, if you who's the guy who put himself up in the box the plexiglass box in London? So he did that That's hardly politics. It was art.
Right? Was it art? And he cheated. Just think he was showing off. Oh, he cheated?
Yeah. He barely ate in between. In between what? Peter has crashed. He had, like yeah.
And and like, I think there was talk You know, he had a blind or something where he was I Oh, when he hit chips. Well, of course, he wasn't a woman. Right? I mean, it's the women who have sort of the real fortitude for this thing. We know from Biden.
Yeah. Peter is. I kinda remember. Okay. I mean, also, when you're looking over such long time periods, I you mean, the whole world was different.
I mean, Lewis makes the whole point that perceptions of of not only a society, but of the entire universe were completely different. And I mean, Bino Bino's book was from, you know, November, December when Lewis was writing about the medieval model of the universe. So everything it's really hard to make comparisons from one place to another when their whole concept of of what is and what's true and what's fact is completely different than what we believe today. Okay. So can we go back to Jeff's, um, apologia for becoming a historian?
Was that what that was? That's a nicer word than tirade. Sure. Jeff suggested that one really compelling reason to be a historian is that it helps you understand the present. If that's the case, should we expect that people who have a strong predilection for wanting to understand the present through the past should study the more recent past?
And people who have a weaker predilection for wanting to pursue the past for the study of the present should get more remote in time and eventually, right? I mean, and eventually they have to all be antiquarians, the classicists, Right? I mean, we we have this I mean, historians, I think it's safe to say, have a deep suspicions about classicist. Right? Are they you know, can they really be historians or are they really sort of a separate thing?
In fact, you know, there are there are sort of two names for them. They can be classicists or they can be ancient historians. What's the difference? Well, there's a big difference. It's just I'll have trouble articulating it to you.
I know it when I see it, but I can't describe it to save myself. Just so he's an ancient historian? Yeah. He was properly an ancient historian, doesn't he? Well Yeah.
But he was a terrible that was a terrible loss for us. Right? We might get stuck with the classicist in replacement, but You see the astrochemist. He is a a nice bird? I think he's more of a I hope that wasn't said with great condescension.
He's wonderful. Well, but there's a reason why classics has has a more fraught understanding, right, of itself as a discipline. And it's partly because it is yet further back in time. Right? And and it and and so there are there are perhaps a greater mix of things that draw people to it.
Although, I mean, obviously, one could be an ancient historian and make the claims that Jeff just made. I'm an ancient historian because I wanna understand the present through the mirror of the past. Well, you could also say that historians' problems with classicists are a classic case of patricide in the sense that, you know, one way of thinking about history in the Western tradition is that it starts with those guys back then, Thucydides and Herodotus, is refracted through a Renaissance which may have happened in the twelfth century or may have happened in the fifteenth or sixteenth century, and which has been left behind at the beginning of the twentieth century, and therefore we have to reject it. So, I mean, the problem lies as much with historians, whoever they are, as it does with classicists, whoever they are. Right.
Right. I don't know which one of you, but This was my original comment. Oh, let's get it quick. I guess it's more of a question to Professor Ribel. You say you want to superimpose the past on modern day to better understand ourselves, But I think we've discussed that it's probably harder to do over the long time periods.
So when I've done a lot of my research, it's easy to make connections between ten, twenty year time periods. So I do a lot of military history and I see that people don't change their strategy and then they wind up walking right into a trap. And as Nick said, you know, the people who grew up in the fifties were doomed in the eighties or in the eighties are doomed now. Mhmm. So is that another possible reason that people become historians is if you can make the connection to history over shorter time periods to apply them today?
Well, think I would say I would say two things in response to that. First, I would say that another way that historians have of being incredibly condescending, and I was sort of doing it kidding me with Ben when I talked about US historians is to suggest that anything that's less than a 100 years old is really journalism not But history at the truth behind that condescension and silly thing to say is that in some senses we can learn a lot more about ourselves by looking at Bynum's crazy fasting women and saying, That is so far out of the realm. How can we possibly think our way back into the mindset either of those women or of the people who wrote chronicles about them that Bynum is relying on. And in that act of real disparity of otherness that we acknowledge in reading about this, that we can also learn a lot about ourselves, our society, the world that we live in today. The other thing I was going to say is that I've sort of toyed with or been tempted to write this article about what is history that I would call between anachronism and antiquarianism.
To me that strikes that's the sort of two poles of what the historian tries to do. The antiquarian cares not at all for the present and wants to lose him or herself entirely in the past block out the present. The anachronist is incapable of appreciating past phenomenon on their own merits, can only understand and accept or reject through the lens of the present. I think what the good historian does, and hopefully what all of us have done today and certainly in the other readings that Professor McCance has given you, is to find the balancing act between the two and to be a little bit of the anachronist and a little bit of the antiquarian whenever necessary, but to have an appreciation for both past and present in trying to construct these narratives. What were gonna say, Miranda?
I think there's also there's a lot of what I've seen is like I've done some study in terms of psychology and stuff and some historical psychology. And I think that it's not just sort of getting the history of, you know, you you know, study history to to figure out the society of nowadays. But it's look it's looking at, you know, these fasting women as individual people, and you go you either go, okay. Well, obviously, I would have done that. You know?
I mean, not with the fasting women, but, like, we can do this with, you know, other people. Like, I mean, I've I mean, I love classic histories and stuff like that, and I probably am an antiquarian completely. But, like, I'll read some of these ones, and they'll be like, they'll make per like, the woman will do something. I'll just, like, you know, it just seem somehow, like, connects with a lot of what I'll either see in myself or like as you know interpersonal relationships between people I've seen around like the psychology of what people are now actually you know systematically studying trying to do experiments for and I feel like you can do a lot of that just from looking at what these things you know the history you have that, of the just the psychology of how people have both changed, and it's not I mean, it, you know, it gets very much affected by, like, is their, you know, what is their belief in the universe, but there's a lot of the feeling of, well, you know, humans' ideas don't change change, but human human nature doesn't. And so that I think that Ideas do change.
Ideas change, but human nature doesn't. And so it's sort of whether or not that's true or not, and going through history and figuring that out. Well, let me ask you a completely was there any other hands up? No. Okay.
Let me ask you a completely off the wall question. And this is something I've actually thought a lot about. And it comes out of my interest in big questions about standard of living, uh, and I've done a lot of work on diets and sort of the material manifestations of welfare. And I mean, you've seen, you know, sort of a side piece of that. But anyway, and and the question is this, is pain historically constructed or socially constructed?
That is, is my experience of pain as somebody who lives in the twenty first century the same or different than someone's experience of pain who, say, lived in the fourth century? And how could I think about that problem? In other words, is pain real and true for all time as a human experience? Or is it mediated? Didn't we talk about the virus?
We must have. It's an issue that really, really, really interests me. But but, I mean, it it it strikes me as so problematic precisely because it speaks to the core problem of being a historian. Right? If we I had a colleague who once said that the only historical fact that is absolutely certain is death.
Okay. That's taxes. Taxes are highly mediated. Let me tell you. Let me tell you.
And and the point there is that when the subject is dead, the subject is really dead. Of course. Not Martin Gare. Yeah, I was gonna say, that's true, that's true. But, I mean, at least to sort of our level of comfort standards.
And some people would say, if the subject is starving, the subject is really starving. If the subject is in pain, the subject is really in pain. Right? They would add, you know, things like pain and starvation or whatever to the set of the facts that we can be comfortable with. Others would not.
And I think how we think about those kinds of questions will inform to a great deal how we think about this sort of, you know, the the way the way that Jeff has posed the problem. Are we, you know, are we antiquarians or are we anachronists? Because it it it has something to do with what we think is really true and immutable versus what we think is possibly open to change. Right? And and the more of the human experience that we can put into the immutable category, then the better able we are to make the big leaps.
Right? If I think lots of human experience is immutable, it's driven by our biology, by our sensory experience, by the fact that we're made up of cells, presumably ourselves and the cells of Walker Bynum's subjects are the same. Right? They had the same kind of configuration of atoms and nuclei and yada yada. Right?
And the the more I the more I believe that that kind of experience stays the same over time, then the easier it's gonna be for me to make these bigger connections. Connections? Right? If I think that all kinds of stuff is socially mediated, or historically mediated, or subject to change over time, then it gets both harder and more interesting. Right?
And this is a question we can't answer. We we can argue about it. We can feel strongly and passionately about it. We can disagree completely, and both sides be completely convinced that they're right. But the truth of matter is we can't we can't settle it.
So he asked some ideas for where you're gonna look about your history of pain? Well, you know, all of this bioarchaeology stuff actually, I think, speaks to this question really well. You know, this this sort of well, bioarchaeology is another good example of those two disciplines, history and biology taking over the rest of the academy. The bioarchaeologists are collecting all of the skeletal material, and they're doing all kinds of fun forensic stuff. They're assessing hypoplasias on the teeth and evidence of iron deficiency anemia in the bone structure, and they're looking at violence, right?
The presence of bullet holes in skulls and arrow tips embedded in bones and all kinds of amazingly cool stuff, right? If you can go to just like one history talk a year, you should go hear a bio archaeologist because they have good slides and they tell great stories. Exactly. And my reading of that literature, and I've actually been trying to read a lot in it because so endlessly fascinating to me. My reading of that is that that pain probably is historically mediated.
Uh, because if I if I sort of catalog that set of experiences that are recorded in the bone structure, and I think about continuing to work and all kinds of other stuff. Right? Or when we refine them, and we think, what were these people doing? Cutting themselves up and flagellating themselves and starving themselves and having such severe gastrointestinal pain. Well, duh, you haven't eaten for seven years.
Of course, you're gonna have gastrointestinal pain. Right? But, I mean, if if we think about those that kind of evidence, um, to me anyway, it's suggestive of modifications in the human experience, or at least modifications from one person to another, whether they have historical component too. Um, another former colleague of mine at one point in a most disparaging comment because he didn't approve of the kind of history I did at all, um, said to me after a talk. He said, I suppose you're gonna try to tell me next that starvation is socially constructed.
And he said it with just dripping sarcasm and contempt. And I don't remember what I said. Probably like, you buffoon, go away. And eventually he did. And he did.
Okay. So, let's throw out one last question. So, what do you think happens when all these historians get together and drink too much? Or I meant what I really meant was when they have when they have faculty meetings. That's what I meant to say.
So what so, I mean, how do we talk? How do we talk to each other? How do we talk to each other? We talk about baseball. I wish you Jeff tries.
But you see, we don't all share that passion either. Some of us hold baseball in utter contempt. Utter contempt. That's awesome. Yeah.
I can say that anywhere I want. Fact in fact, since you've asked, you haven't asked, but but but the best thing about Jeff is that he has periodically taken my children to a baseball game so that I don't have to. Alright. So go home and think about that. When when disciplines are this fractured, if you will, how do they talk to each other?
I don't need all of them back, but I need at least, like, one of them back. Otherwise, I'll have no single copy. That was that was my concern.