Now, what I want to do today is to hear your ideas about your second paper specifically and also about your work in the course, what ideas of a general as well as a particular kind that you may have got on the subject of philosophy in film and other media, above all, emphasizing the paper and ways in which it can still be approved. As you know, I gave everyone an automatic extension provided that person arrived for the last meeting. If and there's one person still absent. If that person doesn't arrive, that's different from all of you. And therefore, use this as an last occasion to make your paper as good as you possibly can.
And I will try to accommodate in terms of when you can hand it in and, of course, give you advice about the contents as I have been all along. And then after that, we will watch The Seventh Seal. I will also give you a very, very brief introduction to it, particularly since it's related to last week's reading, which I hope you've all been able to do by now. So why don't we start on your second paper, and we can begin with Miguel, who's right here speaking loud enough for everybody to hear, including the camera. Well, what do you wanna know?
Well, what's the paper on? What is the problem, thesis that you're pursuing, how is how are you developing it, what's your outside research, how can the class or I help you with it, and in general, how does it bring things together that we've been doing throughout the term since that is the main function of the second paper? So I kind of went away from anything we did in class and decided to focus on Talk of the life. On Rebel Without a Cause. Amplify.
I'm doing it on Rebel Without a Cause Mhmm. And just dealing with the how teenagers deal with death. In relation to what in the course? In relation to the death part of who you wrote, the meaning of death. Oh, okay.
Then tell me. There's a egg in Could you Ramon, could you cut right there? Really? And don't worry about talking too loud. Okay.
Begin again. Alright. Then you're going to talk about I'm actually doing it on death and love because love has been a protruding theme, like, throughout, like, a lot of movies we have seen. Like Go ahead. You you understand.
Yeah. So mean, just like the two characters in that movie, kinda start off being strangers and then they become lovers. And they both have to deal with death, like, the end of the film and in the middle of the film. Because, originally, the girl's boyfriend died, and then she really doesn't deal with the death. She, like, kinda forgets about him.
It's just interesting to me about How does the reading on death and also the love of life Right. There was a I presume. Yeah. You talked about that come in? You talked about this I forget who it was, Hague Hagel something, that he has people deal with death in a certain way.
They forget that they forget about their own death as a means to deal with things. Hegel, how did Segel come back to it? I forget his name. Heiter? Heidelberg.
Yeah. The the inactive reasoning or Inauthentic? Inauthentic. Yes. Okay.
What what is the concept of the inauthentic in in Heidelberg? We talked about how people they they will kind of brush it aside and think that they're being mental and they're not gonna die. They forget about that pretty much. So they kind of push it aside and forget about it, and then just keep going with their lives, pretending that they're not gonna die. Does does that mean one has to sit and brute all the time?
No. No. I mean, you go on with your life. You do it. I mean, with the things you wanna do, you don't I mean, you don't have to do it.
Is Hamlet less inauthentic because he has a speech about to be or not to be on Hartig's view? No. You're just shaking. I heard you're just shaking your I didn't hear I didn't hear you shaking your head. Alright.
Why don't you continue? How do you develop the paper? Well, I started off by explaining the relationship between the two characters and how it developed throughout the film. Like, at first, they're strangers. In the middle, they become kind of friends, and then by the end, they're lovers.
And then their relation the relationship of them dealing with the two deaths the two main deaths of the film. But so far, all you've referred to is the kind of summarization of the plot. That's not what the paper is about. Right. It's about the two dimensions that you read in the first week that are present in my book, really Reality Transformed, the Technical and the Meaningful.
Alright. What are the technical aspects that you analyze? I have to go back. Yeah. Okay.
That's why I wanted to have this this conversation so you would focus your attention on things like that. What about the meaning for Last Script? What is the meaning of that movie? I think it's just coping with being a teenager. It's the main meaning of that movie coping with being, like, young adults dealing with sense do you make out of the title?
Rebel Without a cause. Like, kids rebelling against adults pretty much. No. But that's a cause. Oh, right.
Yeah. So there's something in the nature of that society, that community, those individuals at their particular stage of adolescent life, right, in relation to the school that they go to, in relation to their companions, and the people and the pecking order and all that, which they're rebelling against. But what exactly is it that they're rebelling against? And in what sense don't they have do do they do it without a cause? We do see particular the James Dean character having lots of troubles with his parents.
And the question then is what do they represent in his eyes? Is there a cause that he is standing up to as against them? Remember the year it was made? '55. What is the significance of that date in terms of California culture and history at that point?
Because it takes place in California. That would be something of could be of relevance, not necessarily, but as a matter of fact it is. What was the most obvious cause that would have been relevant to that period. When was the last size of the war that The United States was in? Anyone else?
Iraq. What? Iraq? 1955. Not Iraq.
Iraq. The Korean War. Yeah. And the Korean War itself had to be seen in the context of the aftermath of World War two. And above all, in World War two, there was a cause that everyone recognized in a way that nothing has like it has ever happened before or since.
In the case of the Korean War, there was the general American belief that the communists were ready to take over the world, and they had to be stopped outside of The United States and as close to their borders as possible. First, Korea and then later on Vietnam. And the communist then included the Chinese who were more or less in alliance with the Russians. Right? So this was thought of as a threat and there was a cause.
Now three years later, um, the movie is made. The war is over, um, and you get this period of affluence. And what do you, you know, what do you make of that? I can't really see a relation to the war. I mean, other than the communist thing, like, him wearing a red jacket.
But what was happening in this country? Well, very briefly because this is your paper, not mine. An inability to cope with the affluence, particularly on the part of the young who had never been impoverished and were growing up into it, like like the characters in that movie. That that wasn't that was a problem. It was didn't give them a cause, but there was enough in the together with the usual conflict between the generations to cause someone to be to be a rebel.
Does this will this help you to Yeah. Write it better in terms of technique, which I haven't said anything about, in terms of learning. Correct? Right? Anybody else want to suggest something to Miguel or bring in your own work at this point?
Okay. Edward. Okay. For my paper, I decided to write on The Seventh Seal. And basically, I'm highlighting the ideological contrast presented by the knight and his squire.
And as you watch the movie, you can see that upon realizing that he's about to die, the knight is really trying to look for something to make his life meaningful, whereas the squire just kind of has this great sense of humor towards death the entire time. And I found I don't know if it's humor. Well sarcastic Right. Right. Attitude.
Right. And so I found that this is in line with some of the philosophies on death that were presented by certain philosophers, such as KLEGES and SIMMO for in reference to the Say again? Klages. I'm not sure how you pronounce that. Let me look at K l a g s.
Probably a foreign origin. Oh oh, good. These this is outside research. Outside research. Yeah.
I don't know anything about clagius, if that's the way to pronounce it. So that's and similar Dale Simmel, I do know about. Where did you find centurion? It's. I believe you referenced that.
Right. No. That's fine. Okay. So Or maybe you should show it to the other school.
You probably have the one copied from the library. Right. Anyway, now you know where it is if you if anybody wants to use it. Could you sit, push your, push closer to I think it would be better if you move it on there. So in this book, Choran states that Plagius believes that an individual's existence is a constant dying sort and all life will tend to lead to annihilation.
I mean, it's just a matter of fact. And then Sinald saying that should not be considered life threatening, it's simply the last stage in the life cycle. And I feel that this is somewhat consistent with the views of the squire and that he is not really pursuing a meaning, and he's always providing like a contrast to the knife, who seems to be following more of Heidegger's that death, that knowledge of being towards death will cause for a search for meanings of sorts. He says that the realization of incoming death can make men rise from above a day to day activity, above just being a common place person and you kind of see that transformation in the night when he realizes that death is coming for him and The other thing that I wanted to mention was kind of the contrast on how people that are dying perceive death and the people that are alive and you can see this between the knight and the squire and then the the two actors because as the knight saves them from dying, then you can immediately see that once death has passed them over, their attitude changes, and they go on living with their child and whatnot.
The the family. Yeah. The two actors are the family. It seems it seems as if you know what you're doing. How far have you got on the paper?
I've just started basically writing about the character position between the two knight and the squire. But, I mean, how how how close are you to finishing it? Oh, I'm about I'm halfway. How can we help? I was just wondering if there was a stronger way to correlate the knight and the squires thing with the family thing.
It kind of seems not completely related and You've seen the movie only once? Right. Seeing it today may Okay. Give you new ideas. And very briefly, are a couple of things I'll be saying before we watch the movie.
In general, I think you probably are on the right track. You remember the that movie together with the outside reading is sufficient for the second paper because you you can't will not have been able to watch in class The Seventh Seal until after the paper was due today, so that's alright. Going back to Miguel now, I forgot to ask what outside research you're doing. I need to look for something else. I just looked at random and everything.
No. You've gotta do you've gotta do something substantial. And it well, it depends on whether you emphasize the technique or the meaningfulness. For the technique, there are various things in, for instance, the anthology edited by Cohen and Mast called film theory and criticism. A very fat anthology, you can find material in there.
I don't mean you have to read the whole anthology. One article, if you handle it properly, and that's true of all of you. You've got to analyze carefully your outside research. You can't just name drop or and you've got to give perfect complete references to the pages to indicate that you really have worked at it. But one one or two articles will be sufficient, especially since the the movie is outside the course.
Alright? Alright. Anything either of you want to say that we can help with? Alright then. Ramon?
Stop. Ramon. All right. The next is David. Tell me about your paper.
I was going to use your the meaning of death concept again, and I found this really good article. I was interested in what you said about Heidegger. Is that a concept of Heidegger? And then his position. So that was, like, a really interesting position.
So I found this really good paper that outlines his whole concept of time. So I was thinking about outlining his position, then I don't really agree with it. I like your the Santor Nyano's view about life and death as opposed to Heidegger's, so I was gonna write a response to Heidegger's position. And then I was gonna extend that because I think Heidegger's says, like, death is very defined in life and you have to confront death to to be authentic and live life. And I think it'd be interesting to analyze his views with respect to religion and suicide.
I think if you believe God controls your death, can't really be authentic because have to control it. You have because if God controls it, you're not going be authentic. Then would suicide be the ultimate confrontation of death and like his views and other philosophies. Okay, this isn't going to be a paper on Heidegger and Singer, it's going to be a paper on philosophy and film. Yeah.
Okay, so which is it, how are we going to do that? I was going to use, I was going watch Seven Seals. I haven't watched it yet, I was gonna hopefully tie it to me with the Seventh Seal. I'm not catching what you said. I was gonna but I haven't seen the Seventh Seal yet, so I was gonna Oh, you thought you would use Seventh Seal.
Yeah. I think that makes a lot of sense. The Seventh Seal lends itself Yeah. To that, and that's why I wanted you to watch it. Also, there are now at least two we're gonna deal with the seventh seal, remember that in the course we've been dealing with the nature of myths and the nature of myths in filmmaking.
So that there was the big man in myths. There was the lady eve that we started out with. That is the biblical myth, the myth of creation. There was a myth about absolute knowledge in relation to the turn of the screw and then the opera, and then the the variety of male female myths that come into Washington Square. Right?
I I don't I don't think I haven't touched on older films, but there's always a film that is a an anchor to these quasi philosophical and investigations. What would be the way in which you would use do you think oh, well, you can't tell yet until you've seen the movie. Yeah. I was hoping maybe like the myth of death almost and if, I mean the movie, what I've learned in the movie, which I talked to it a little bit, I read about it is that death comes take the night. Death comes take the night, like there's a religious aspect to that.
So does the night control his own death? Is he authentic in high degree view or something along those lines? One thing you might wanna think about in terms of comparable myths, there's a myth that life that death is meaningful, which is related to the religious view that death is, um, the transition to another world which is benign because there is a good god who has arranged it that way. And, of course, whether or not people believe in god, everyone would like the idea that the grave is not the end. Right?
But maybe that whole way of thinking is a myth in the broad sense of being a poetic fiction rather than something authentic. The fact that something I mean I mean literally authentic. The fact that something is only a myth doesn't mean you can't believe it. Many people, religious people, say we know that our religious belief is based on myths, but they're good myths and they help us to live better and give us a better expectation or hope of what will happen, for instance, after death. The other kind of myth would be the one in which what can't be proved scientifically can't be taken seriously.
Since life after death has never been proved scientifically, though people have tried to do that, people who believe in this in ghosts or mediums or other ways of getting to the other side as it's called, as if there is another side. They have often sought some scientific evidence or proof about life after death and therefore that death isn't the end. The skeptical view might be just as much of a myth. Where does that leave us then? That could be one of the questions and is very relevant to the seventh seal where you have the knight who is religious but craving some proof, and there's the, uh, squire who is scornful of all religion, who's lived through horrible things in the in the crusades, and, uh, who is skeptical of any, uh, religious explanations.
And the two are balanced against each other. Alright? Does that help? Yes. Okay.
And remember, technique as well as the form is relevant. The outside research, you've said there are a couple of other things, have to be dealt with carefully and completely footnoted. And again, uh, 14 fonts so I can easily read it and, uh, word count so I don't have to worry about the length. The minimum required length is 2,000 words, remember, but you can go beyond that and should feel to do so if you think it's any good. If it isn't, that's not gonna help you.
Alright, Catherine? Well, for my paper, I was gonna write about eight and a half And this You finally got in a struggle? Yeah. Yeah. My DVD finally arrived on Friday.
So my my original topic got a little bit trashed because of the fact that what I remembered of the film from a year ago was a little different than when I rewatched the film and realized what what the film is actually about. But so what I think I'm going to do and what I've started to outline was there are are three main myths that I see, you know, that are depicted through the protagonist fantasies. The myth of his ideal woman, the between, you know, the virgin, his wife, the whore, his mistress, and the ideal woman Claudia, that's one myth. And then there's the myth of the Seregina which is a religious, you know, God and Satan and, you know, love is a sin. The last one which is, you know, from his famous harem scene in the farmhouse which is I'm not sure if I want to approach that particular aspect of the film as more of a harem sort of, what he believes love is or isn't.
Or I've read a few papers that say that that is a scene that depicts young young's idea of the anima of his his mind, basically, because it's all the women he's ever known. So I'm not sure about that last part, but is it Why can't it be taken as transcended? It's a fantasy. Mhmm. And the typical male fantasy is that all the women love him because remember, however badly he treats them, they all there's something that he has which is very valuable to them, and they dote on him.
He's the only male. It's his heron. This is a a male daydream at a time when women were willing to tolerate such daydreams. I think it's a little harder to for males to have them anymore because women won't play that game, don't have to. Right?
Why do why does Jung have to commit to it? Sorry. Can you say that again? Jung, you said, didn't I I I read a I one of the well, books I was reading through mentioned that there was some relation to I'm not that familiar with the the philosoph philosophical background for that, but they were saying that it sort of depicts his mind in the sense that the one she's a lounge singer or something, the girl with all the feathers is being sent upstairs because he's forgetting about her and she's no longer needed, and the girls who are no longer needed are sent upstairs. So it's sort of like his mind in the sense that these are the girls that he loves.
And when he when they cease to be as important to her, they are sent sort of to this back area of his mind that he doesn't really think about. So I don't know if that's as important, but I I I do wanna cover that scene because it's important No. You're working exception of what Tell me what's the outside reading is you say you mentioned. You mentioned there are some But I right now, I have this stack of books, and I've sort of gone through them, and I've narrowed it down to a few I don't remember the titles offhand because I'm working with about five different books, about a chapter in each of them that actually cover there there are books that cover a lot of Fellini stones, so there's about a chapter in each of them. No.
Okay. No. That's good. I mean, you seem to be on the path. I I in general, how all these myths relate to the protagonist's understanding and acceptance of his love for these the people that he cares about his life, which is what the the ending of the film is.
And how are they how is the material specifically related to the cause? I'm trying to work back to that because originally when I started working with film, I and I was working from memory. I was going to write a paper about his the pursuit of his ideal woman, which I figured could be related back to, like, the Pygmalion myth. But as it turned out, when I rewatched the film, most of the film is not really about his the presumed ideal woman. That's one part of the larger picture.
So What about entirely sure I touchdown meaning and technique. You'll keep that in mind, I hope. What is it about the technique that conveys just the meaning that Fellini wanted? And how is it that that meaning is dependent upon whatever technique is relevant? That's very important in in understanding the nature of the course and developing the ideas of the course in your own way.
Together with the whole idea of film as a myth making art. Right? Okay. But can we help? Does anybody else want to say anything?
No. I think we're doing very well. Let me see about the time. The movie is about ninety minutes long. Could you check on that in the back?
Yes. Ninety six minutes. It is ninety minutes long. Alright. So that's we have to stop at 03:30, And so we do have time now.
Okay. Go ahead. Oh, mean, anything else, Carrie? Catherine? No.
Or then Carrie wanted to So I watched The Seventh Seal. The first time I watched it, I found it very interesting. I watched it a few more times. And there's some points in it that I find extremely interesting. Well, first of all, with the knight and the squire, all the characters are extremely strong characters, and they're also flat throughout the whole entire movie.
There is no change at all in any of the characters. No what? There's no change at all in any of the characters. And that's, like, most evidence of That well, that's something you should argue. Well, right.
So in the final scene with Antonius Blotcombe, he's he has committed this act, which is save the family, and it seems like he said that was important to him in the confession scene, but still his lack of knowledge of God is making him entirely static. And that actually wasn't important to him. But at that moment, the other Joseph, I guess, Joff, his visions were at the moment when Tonya Spock was committing his his important action, his visions were legitimized. And he early on had a vision of because he sees death, and death is really playing him in chess. And early in the beginning of the movie, he had seen the Virgin Mary with Jesus.
In a sense, he had seen God. And if he had just talked with Antonius Block, Antonius Block might have realized that God does make himself known at times. And that Oh, that's an interesting point. I don't want to elaborate on that before some of you have seen the movie. But keep that in mind, the question of God making himself evident.
And so in a sense, even all the characters are flat and can't identify with any characters and achieve growth in the movie through that, we sort of identify through the entire cast of characters. Joseph And is seen as well, early on he's called the if he's the like the says something about the fool and that being the human soul. Well, said certainly you could play the human soul to Joff. He So in a sense, the human soul does survive, as demonstrated by the movie. Another point I wanted to make, which is just structural, is when you it's an allegorical framework and playing chess with death.
But it seems as if death should be able to play a perfect game of chess. And that chess doesn't really reflect life and that you're you can't really win. You you when winning winning in that game, at least as they say, he'll then he lives. He doesn't die. But that doesn't really make sense.
Like, death always wins. Well, let's say that maybe the point is we don't know that much about death. Right. We don't know that much about death. Maybe death doesn't always win.
Right. That maybe death doesn't always win. You give me a good idea that I want to throw out for you. You read Pygmalion, and I saw the movie. Another play of Shaw is called Back to Methuselah.
It's really not a play because it takes thirteen hours to perform. And so there may have been one or two festival performances in the last forty, fifty years since it was written, but it isn't often performed in a thirteen hour play. It consists in a number of segments that are really plays, and the idea is that Methuselah was the character in the bible who lived to be 900 years. And so this is back to that kind of possibility. You all know about Methuselah?
And and in Porgy and Bess, the opera by George Gershwin, there's a song by by the Thornton Life is his name, who is a playboy. And it's an all black cast. And he sings a kind of parody of a spiritual song, and the words are, it ain't necessarily so. The bible tells you all sorts of things, but it ain't necessarily so. And one of the refrains is Methuselah lived 900.
Methuselah lived nine hundred years, but who calls that living when no gal will give in to no guy what's nine hundred years? So it ain't necessarily so. But the Back to Methuselah Shaw begins with Lilith, who was earlier than Adam and Eve, and along the way, people start living longer and longer, and it's a matter of will. And at some point, somebody wills not to die, and thereafter, they keep on not dying. In the last act, the human race has conquered death.
They can live forever. They they work at all sorts of scientific problems and like Christmas childbirth taking place out of an egg like a like a bird instead of wasting all those precious years in in gestation and childhood and development. So out of an egg, and this happens on the stage, somebody, something inside starts hammering at it and out comes a young woman aged 18, fully formed and very advanced intellect because they do it that way instead of waiting. So it's a little more like the way chicks can survive when they come out of the egg. So they are a very advanced civilization and they're deathless.
The only problem is they still are living in the body. So the big project that they're facing is how to get rid of the body completely and then be pure spirits floating forever in the atmosphere. Alright? How did we get into this? How did I get the knowledge done?
Oh, the idea of death. No. Point is, what if we were a different kind of species? Since we're not that kind of species and death is represented, there isn't a right way or wrong way. So there's no contradiction in your saying death is going win out, so of course you'll finally win the chess game.
Maybe this will be an innovation. The knight will defeat death in the chess game and keep on living. There's another myth for that, the myth of the Baron Munchausen who doesn't die. So this would be an example of that. You can't you see, you can't approach a fiction or a myth the way you would approach something that is an established truth since the fiction and myth deals in imagination.
And you can imagine people defeating death both in chess and in and never dying. That sort of eventually gets says, well, I've got two more important things to do and all sorts of other people to take to my kingdom, leave you alone, and then he forgets about and so on. You know? So there isn't a right way or a wrong way. Well, I I think death should always win, and therefore, death Should?
Yeah. I think that should I think I I think that should play the perfect game of chess in in a sense. And then playing against chess I mean, and the the only reason why Death Death is not playing the knight because he might lose. It's not like there's any risk involved. He's just playing it because he enjoys playing.
Okay. Now this is gonna possibly ruin it for those who haven't seen the movie. So not not really. It's such a rich, wonderful movie. Uh-huh.
How does Jess how does death win? Well, in it's at least He what? Supposedly, seems, we're given the impression that he learns of the knight's strategy through By cheating. By cheating. Yeah.
Okay. So what's the what's the significance of cheating? I I mean, I think that's pretty much just a joke. What do you what's the significance of him using the cheating? I I really think that's just a joke.
I I think that No. The knight is looking for any kind of glimmer of evidence about God. Only God would give him a sign. And then here's the here's death, and he takes that as evidence of a sort. But if you think of death as not coming from God, but coming from nature where everything dies, it's a kind of cheat.
So nature cheats us. It gives us a sense of buoyancy, joy, of happiness when things go well, right, at almost any age, and then all of a sudden it pulls the rug from under you and the doctor says, You've got a day to live. Nature is unscrupulous. Nature has no concern apparently with what's good or bad for the inhabitants of nature. It has bigger things to deal with, which is the survival of the species, the continuance of life, all kinds of considerations that enable it to sacrifice the billions of baby oysters.
Oh, not oysters. Turtles. Remember who are the eggs in the sand and they come up and they nature tells them to survive you've got to run like hell to get into the water and they all do it. They do it at the same time and that doing it at the same time makes them an attractive target because look at all that free food lying around. And so the birds and other creatures descend upon them, and a very large number of them are destroyed before they get to the water.
And then in the water, a lot are destroyed by the sea lions and other creatures. So the only fraction ever survive, And yet once, if you've ever seen pictures of these wonderful young creatures running to get into that water, you think what are the sets of vitality and then all of a sudden, they're destroyed. Well, nature cheats us that way. You know, it's no guarantee of it. It gives no guarantees.
It it encourages one, and then it knocks one down. It's the sort of thing that Orson Welles lamented that somebody with his talents was encouraged to express them. And as once he did, he was punished for that. Well, that's what nature always says. That could be what devil represent the devil not devil, what death represents.
So worthy worthy of your explanation exploration would be what is the meaning of death and the way in which he plays agrees to play a game, which is a a life enhancing activity, with this noble warrior who is the knight. And can he be defeated? Can't death be defeated? Can he not? That's worth it for In terms of the form, there's so much you could say about Seventh Seal.
Will you do that? Mean, Yeah. That's going be part of my focus. And then for I mean, I would like to develop some sort of overall vision of the meaning of death in the context of the film? I mean, is no character I the meaning of life, in a sense, and there's no character really.
They all have different views of the meaning of life and the meaning of death. Well, but one point you just now made in passing is very promising, very interesting, which I hadn't thought of, but it's I don't know that I agree, which is that there's no character development, that they're all flat. No. Totally flat. Now what if that's is that deal with that in relation to other myths?
Is that true myth making to begin with? And second, there are developments in inference, Jung's, the the poet who has the visions. You know, he changes in the movie, and he no. He he at times is willing to make himself into a fool in the tavern just to survive, and yet he also has the noble vision of the virgin. And at the end, he is the only one who sees death except for the night Mhmm.
But he does not die. Is that a way of saying art goes on? I mean, that's the development in his character that also has some great meaning to it. What it is is for you to determine and analyze. I don't think that necessarily makes him not flat.
I think it's we we definitely we definitely learn more about him in a sense. But as a whole, he doesn't seem to undergo any sort of emotional operation. Well, let's see. You could take any Yeah. Any view you want.
But bring in the extra research Yeah. And and analyze it more than you did on the first. Mhmm. Yeah. For the extra research, I'm still not sure what kind of I don't have a good idea.
Well, there are lots written on on Bergman. If you go to, uh, Roach, you'll see a shelf full of books about him, particularly this one, which is considered by many people the greatest movie ever made, one of the always one of the top 10, and it's been around now for fifty years because we were made in the middle of the 1950s, '55, '54, around there. So you'll find lots of material. Okay. But you've got a sewage.
Okay. Lauren? I was I watched The Seven Seals also. And What? I'm listening.
Oh, okay. I I'm still kinda struggling with it. I'm I've started writing about what is the meaning of life and how does for each character and how does this affect their avocados. For each character? Yeah.
Or Well, give me give me a give me an example. Well, I'm kind of struggling with the actors, Mia and Jeff, like, it seems they're almost like blind faith. They're really the typical kind of They have faith in what? In in some I'm not really sure if it's God or what it is. It just seems that they like me, I always just says, I'm so happy every day.
It's like the next day. It seems like they don't really think about it. They just kind of accept it and Well, that's an interesting idea that they have faith because maybe have faith in the goodness of life Yeah. I know. Because they have a good life necessarily.
And they have a beautiful baby, and they love each other. And they're artists who are devoted to their art. Mhmm. That's true. And maybe you can't succeed as well as they do, uh, unless you unless you do have some kind of faith or if only faith in life.
Yeah, I'm not necessarily sure that it's a higher power that they have faith in, but it's Well, there may be. It may be faith in in the Virgin or something that of the sort that that Job sees in his in his vision. Mhmm. Have you done any outside research? Mhmm.
No. I was gonna look at probably one of the resources that you had in the Meaning of Life paper. Well, but also on the seventeenth research, sort of, I just mentioned the term. Okay. You you wanna get to work because there isn't much time, really.
Yeah. Well, I kind of changed. I was starting to write on Dubliners, then I watched the seventh seal, and that seemed a lot more appealing, I'm kinda starting over. Alright. Anybody want to say that can be of help to Terry or Laura?
Alright, for your lips. So I'm running by the imagination. Throw your voice more. Go ahead. I'm running about imagination and my You're not throwing it.
Okay. I'm writing about imagination and the overall theme is how it adds or enhances meaning in life. And the two the two movies I'm using are Life is Beautiful and Annalene. So in Life is Beautiful, I talk about how imagination is able to add meaning in such a way that it almost replaces What was your first paper about it? My first paper was that sexuality in turn of the About what?
Sexuality in turn of the screw. What in turn of the screw? Sexuality. Sexuality in the turn of the screw. Turn of the screw.
Okay. Well, then this is a different topic. Yeah. This is a And since you bring in life is beautiful, you're getting beyond the course requirements, which is what was needed. What about outside research?
So that I haven't decided on yet. I need to look for something still. There is a DVD of Ameli and his bonus material. Oh, I have. Now if the bonus material is really new and interesting, then that counts as some outside research because you, you know, you only had to watch the movie.
In the case of Life is Beautiful, I assume there is already some kind of critical literature since it won the Academy Awards, but you really have to focus on that. Hold on just a second. Points in your time. Alright. So what are you gonna do with those?
So with life is beautiful, I talked about how imagination is able to almost replace the meaning that would otherwise be present in life for the boy at least, and also for the adults because them telling the boy the story is kind of giving them meaning to their life as well. And in Emily, I talk about more not how imagination replaces the meaning of ordinary life, but how it enhances it, especially in the case of Emily because she's introverted, and it helps her experience things that she wouldn't otherwise experience. You know, I don't know quite what to say to help. Is there any way you can think of that the others or I can help you with the paper? Right now, I just think I need need to I need to start writing because I have a sentence outline for the life is beautiful part.
I haven't really touched the Emily part, and I think I just need to start writing. And as I write, it's like an email. Well, you definitely ought to get the DVD. It's on reserve in the film library. Yeah.
I own it. The film, you own it? Yeah. Fine. Better yet.
And see where that leads you. In the case of Amelie, there are so many interesting things that are cinematographically excellent. I mean, they're excellent cinematography. If you haven't dealt with that at all in the first paper, you could bring it in, but without that being the focus of the second paper because the second paper has to go beyond the required work. Right?
But you could do a lot and see how it takes you into other areas. But as yet, you haven't said anything about writings that you've read that you're gonna use. At this point well, I read your the chapter that you gave us in your book. But that was required that was required reading. Right.
I think I also gave you the chapter on idealization, didn't I? Yeah. Did I give you an either the chapter on consummation or no. I did. Yeah.
But not the one on the aesthetic. Did I? That's another chapter in the same book, and it tries to bring the earlier chapters a little further, move them a little further, you might want to look at that. Okay. Peter?
I'm covering the concepts of self love and selfishness, so the contrast between them. In relation to what? In relation to Pride and Prejudice, the movie, which need to, which brings up a point. You told me you've seen the 1940 version of it. I haven't, there is also two other more recent versions, but I haven't been able to find the 1940 version anyway.
So was wondering I can't believe that because Yeah. It's just That's the one that's that's probably sold for $5 an hour. You could easily find it somewhere. I could get it, but I can't get it mailed in time. That's the thing.
It's only they're all online and now we decided on the last week so that's been open. But um Well, try the book. Do you have access to the Boston Public Library? No. No?
Is there any left? Wait a minute. Anyhow, that would be in the film library. Did you go to At MIT? No.
Well, I I've been to, like, BU and MIT. You went to the Fourth Floor Of Building 14? I looked I searched for it online, and it wasn't it didn't come out online. I'm sure it's up there. I can't believe it's not up yet.
That wasn't there, and also your No. No. Call up. Okay. I will.
Yeah. Because I I searched everywhere, but it wasn't but maybe I should just go in and talk to someone there. Stug Purdy. Douglas Purdy. Purdy?
He's there right now because I picked up something from him before coming to class. And tell him you need it for this course until you learn it. And I can't believe that it isn't sitting there on the shelves. The nineteenth of the 40 Hollywood production Yes. Of Pride and Prejudice.
There may be a better movie. I don't know I don't know about the the more recent ones. Yeah. And so but that's one I do know, so there's no reason not to use that. Yeah.
Oh. It has Greer Garson in it and I think Lawrence Olivier. I'm not sure. Right. But, you know, it's a standard successful Hollywood movie.
It may have won some Oscars or whatever at the time. Alright. But what are you gonna do with this? Subplug? Yeah.
And that? Some of the other works were Harmony in Harmony in Nature. Harmony in Nature. What did they answer? Your book Harmony in Nature.
Oh, you you can use that. No. No. But I mean, are you going to use Jane Austen who wrote the novel that the movies are based on? Don't mind using the movies.
Yeah. But it's alright to look at Harmony of Nature and Spirit, but it's thin in terms of the specific use that you made. Right. Well, I don't know. You told me I should look at that last week.
So I'm trying to look for that, but it's not in the library. It's listed as I don't know. It's listed as in library, but the books are No. It's stolen. I'm very lucky that.
Or else it's in the community's reserve room. Did you try that? Yes. Definitely not. I have it on waiting.
I have it on search actually. I put it on search for a few times earlier. More important than those books of mine are film studies that deal with technique and that are about, for instance, the Hollywood movie. I'm sure there are books written about that. You should and you should be you should be able to find something on the move on the Hollywood movie there.
Yeah. So I what you've told me now doesn't add up too much, so I'm a little worried. Well, to explain to you what I You have to written it. I didn't know. I've looked at other works of and and I No.
No. No. You're getting too far afield that I think you've got to Well, this is just zero in on some topic that you can work on concretely and in detail in relation to something that's relevant to philosophy and film. Well, the thing that I've telling you actually you told me to look at last week. I.
No. Without I I have some suggestions, but most of the research is up to you. Right. Because I I can't I don't wanna tell you what topic you should follow. It's gonna be something that matters to you.
Yeah. And then you have to follow the trail to something that you would be proud of. No? Mhmm. Is there anything any specific question you wanna ask now, right now?
No. Can anyone else help Peter in this? Do you have any advice or anything you want to say? All right. The paper is due today, but I said I'd give you all an extension.
The grades are due a week from today or tomorrow, and I need some time to do your papers justice and the papers of my other course. So I can't give you much of an extension. Going around the class, can you tell me two things? When you can finish it and get it to me, you're not instead, you're not writing the paper. You're not writing the paper.
Sorry? You're not writing the paper. No. You don't have to. It's just that I've had listeners who wanted to and I graded them like everybody else's.
Um, but they were just listeners like you, but there's no reason why you shouldn't. Two two questions. One, when can you definitely get it to me? And two, ideally, much time do you need if you could do it and really do a good job? Ideally, what would the date be at which you would hand it in?
I and I'll tell you as we go on what what is possible and what is not possible. So why don't we start again with Miguel? Thursday. Latest. Thursday.
And that is which? This is ideal or Both. Both. Alright. I think I ought to make a note of this for each of you.
So everyone. It's a pen. Do do you have a pencil instead? Yeah. I don't have pen.
Thank you. Alright. Serious. About you, Rick? I'd like to get in by Thursday, but my ideal due date would be Friday probably because I Friday.
Because I also have another pretty heavy lab report that's No. Understand. No. No. You don't have to justify it.
I appreciate my sympathizer with the the time of strain and making do. Now I can't find your cards. Okay. What I'm gonna do is put you down for Thursday. And if you really say you get in touch with me and say I finished it, but if I could have another day, then I'll see what state I'm in.
Friday, know I'm leaving town, so it may be you may be in parallel if you don't live up to these expectations. I think if I get checked your papers by Thursday, I can manage. David? I get you by Wednesday. I guess the ideal would be Thursday.
Ideal? Ideal will be Thursday. Yeah. Alright. So it's Thursday also.
Naturally, if I get it earlier, then I can have more time for that paper. If it's one among the others, I may get tired of one thing or another. Uh, Catherine? Um, I think I could get a number by Thursday, but ideally Friday, but if you're going out of town, I'll try your best for Thursday. Okay.
Sorry. So I could get to you on Wednesday. Great. Okay. That'll help.
Okay. But ideally, Friday. Sounds like Wednesday. No. Don't make it Friday.
Make it Wednesday or Thursday. But Wednesday would be better. Okay. But as you see, since I'm agreeing to other people getting it on Thursday, when I say it would be better, in the sense that it would, you know, give you priority, but the you won't be marked down because it comes in on Thursday if it does. Lauren?
I can do it on Thursday and I'm gonna try really hard. Ideally, would be Friday, but I'm gonna try really hard to do it by Thursday. No. I didn't say anything about Friday. Ideally, it's Friday, but I'm gonna really try to get it in on Thursday.
Okay. Well, let's put you down for Thursday. Try it for Thursday. And is it Friday in the morning that you need it? Yeah.
You're leaving Friday afternoon? Well, but I'm going with other people, and I don't know the time. Okay. Lex? I was looking Friday as No, it's too late.
Thursday? Okay. I'm not actually sure I can finish it by Thursday. And then you then you'll have to be in touch with me. Okay.
And Peter? Thursday. Thursday? Yeah. That's right.
Had don't let this to share with you, Peter, but I had the feeling that you really haven't made much progress yet. So Yeah. There isn't much time. You've really got to I have I have been looking around. Turn but, no, you've got to not just look around, but Yeah.
Start writing it right and doing concrete research and know what you're gonna do right away. Alright. You all know how to reach me by email. And in terms of a crisis, you you ought to write down my phone number. But I see that it's about time for us to to go watch the film.
It's actually a little bit more than an hour and a half. Slightly more than anyone. Well, you're gonna walk over. So why don't we terminate now? And let me, one more, say farewell for this course to the viewing audience out there in the hypers the hyperspace, and I hope to see you again in another course.
Bye bye.
